Title: Global Context or Local Detail? Adaptive Visual Grounding for Hallucination Mitigation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.24396v1

Published Time: Tue, 28 Apr 2026 02:08:20 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# Global Context or Local Detail? Adaptive Visual Grounding for Hallucination Mitigation 

## Yubo Jiang 1,2 Xin Yang 2 Abudukelimu Wuerkaixi 2 Zheming Yuan 1 Xuxin Cheng 2

## Fengying Xie 1,3 Zhiguo Jiang 3 Cao Liu 2 Ke Zeng 2 † Haopeng Zhang 1,3 †

> 1

## School of Astronautics, Beihang University, Beijing 102206, China 

> 2

## Longcat Interaction Team, Meituan, Beijing 100102, China 

> 3

## Tianmushan Laboratory, Beihang University, Hangzhou 311115, China 

> {jbond0409, zhanghaopeng}@buaa.edu.cn (Y.J., H.Z.)

## Abstract 

Large vision–language models (LVLMs) excel at multimodal reasoning but still suffer from object-existence hallucinations when multi-step deliberation decouples from visual evi-dence. Think-with-Images (TwI) attempts to counter this by generating auxiliary observa-tions (e.g., zoomed crops or highlighted views), yet it is not reliably beneficial. We identify two coupled failure modes: (1) a granularity– context trade-off of common operators, where zoom-in improves local detail but breaks global relations, while highlighting preserves topol-ogy but lacks fine evidence; and (2) an over-trust issue in tool-guided region proposals, where mislocalized evidence can dominate rea-soning and even underperform standard prompt-ing. We propose Active-Look, a training-free, plug-and-play TwI framework that allocates visual computation by uncertainty. Active-Look runs two heterogeneous grounding ex-perts in parallel and uses their disagreement as a proxy for uncertainty, spending the budget only to verify disputed regions. It further miti-gates the operator trade-off with conflict-aware hybrid rendering: highlighting retains global context, while selective zoom-in performs lo-cal verification. Experiments on hallucination-focused and general benchmarks (POPE, MME, and CHAIR) across multiple LVLM backbones show consistent gains. 

## 1 Introduction 

Large Vision–Language Models (LVLMs) have re-cently advanced multimodal reasoning by extend-ing chain-of-thought style deliberation to visual inputs (Zhang et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2025; Wei et al., 2022). Yet a persistent failure mode remains: textual reasoning can drift away from visual ev-idence, causing object-existence hallucinations— models confidently claim objects or attributes that  

> 1†indicates the corresponding authors.

are absent from the image (Lyu et al., 2023; Leng et al., 2024; Rohrbach et al., 2018a). One key rea-son is the one-shot perception pipeline: the image is encoded once into a static representation, and subsequent multi-step reasoning proceeds mostly in the language space with limited opportunities to re-check uncertain details (Figure 1a). Recent work advocates Think-with-Images (TwI), where the model actively generates aux-iliary observations (e.g., zoomed crops or high-lighted regions) to support reasoning (Su et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2025b,c). However, two obsta-cles limit TwI reliability. First, TwI operations face a structural granularity–context trade-off: zooming improves local evidence but can break global topol-ogy and relations needed for compositional reason-ing, while global highlighting preserves context yet often lacks resolution for small or ambiguous objects. This tension leads to bifurcated behavior— the same operation may help one subset of sam-ples but harm another (Su et al., 2025; Zhao et al., 2025). Second, many TwI pipelines depend on a single perception tool to decide where to look; a tool mistake becomes a single point of failure. A naive fix—stacking multiple tools and taking their union—can inject noisy proposals; when tools dis-agree, false positives may accumulate, degrading evidence quality rather than improving it (Zhang et al., 2025a). Moreover, although TwI is used to improve multimodal reasoning, existing work pro-vides limited and fragmented evaluation on object-existence hallucinations, and a mechanistic under-standing of when TwI helps or hurts remains under-developed (Liu et al., 2025; Leng et al., 2024). Motivated by these observations, we propose 

Active-Look , a conflict-driven active verification framework for TwI that allocates visual computa-tion based on uncertainty (Han et al., 2024; Talebi-rad and Nadiri, 2023). Active-Look follows three principles: (i) uncertainty from disagreement—run heterogeneous dual experts in parallel and use their 

> arXiv:2604.24396v1 [cs.CV] 27 Apr 2026 Figure 1: (a) Think about images: Traditional LVLMs rely on a one-time static encoding of the global image. (b) Think with images (Active-Look): Our TwI paradigm transforms the image into a real-time observation object. It actively generates auxiliary visual inputs through image manipulations to facilitate the model’s reasoning process.

disagreement to localize ambiguous regions; (ii) selective verification under budget—trigger addi-tional perception only for flagged regions to control visual tokens; (iii) context-preserving evidence— combine local verification with global context re-tention to resolve fine details without losing rela-tional structure (Figure 1b). We first formalize TwI as budgeted visual evi-dence acquisition (Section 5) and conduct diagnos-tics that expose (i) the granularity–context trade-off between zoom and highlight, and (ii) TwI fragility under tool errors (Section 4). We then intro-duce Active-Look and evaluate it on hallucination-focused and general multimodal benchmarks across multiple LVLM backbones, showing reductions in hallucination while maintaining or improving VQA performance (He et al., 2025; Li et al., 2024b). Beyond gains, we provide mechanistic analyses explaining when naive multi-tool union fails and how conflict-aware arbitration stabilizes TwI. Our contributions are as follows: • We characterize a consistent granularity– context trade-off in TwI operations (zoom vs. highlight) and show it induces performance bifurcation across sample regimes. • We propose Active-Look, a conflict-driven verification framework that uses dual-expert disagreement to trigger selective re-perception while preserving global context. • We demonstrate consistent improvements on hallucination and general multimodal bench-marks, and provide mechanistic evidence for why naive multi-tool union can degrade per-formance and how conflict-aware arbitration mitigates it. 

## 2 Related Work 

2.1 Large Vision–Language Models (LVLMs) 

Large vision–language models such as LLaVA (Liu et al., 2023), Qwen3-VL (Bai et al., 2025), and InternVL2 (Chen et al., 2024) have pushed multi-modal reasoning by scaling alignment and visual capacity. Despite differences in architecture and training recipes, most LVLMs still follow a single-pass perception pipeline: the image is encoded once and provided as a static context for subse-quent decoding. This design makes it difficult to revisit uncertain visual evidence during multi-step reasoning, which can leave intermediate conclu-sions weakly grounded. Our work complements LVLM backbones by enabling selective evidence re-acquisition at inference time, without modifying model weights (Wu et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2022). 

2.2 Object Hallucination Mitigation 

Object hallucination remains a critical challenge for LVLMs. Within inference-time mitigations, decoding-based methods like VCD (Leng et al., 2024) and OPERA (Huang et al., 2024) adjust to-ken generation but neglect underlying visual ambi-guities. Alternatively, tool-augmented frameworks such as Woodpecker (Yin et al., 2024) offer effec-tiveness but incur significant overhead due to itera-tive interactions. In contrast, Active-Look targets the evidence level via a lightweight verification mechanism, selectively triggering additional per-ception only upon expert disagreement to ensure computational efficiency. 

2.3 Think-with-Images Paradigm 

Think-with-Images reframes inference as interac-tive evidence acquisition, where the model gen-erates auxiliary visual inputs to support reason-ing. OpenAI o3 (OpenAI et al., 2025) also demon-strates the promise of thinking with images, al-though its internal mechanism remains unclear (Su et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2025). Common instantia-tions include zoom-in cropping to amplify small or subtle evidence and visual prompting or high-lighting to preserve global context while steering attention. However, prior work often commits to a fixed operator and lacks controlled analysis of the granularity–context trade-off that emerges across different sample regimes. Tool-guided variants rely on a single detector, inheriting a brittle failure mode when the tool is wrong. Our work provides a uni-fied TwI formalization and diagnostic analyses, and introduces a conflict-aware arbitration mechanism based on dual-expert disagreement to stabilize tool-guided visual thinking in a training-free, plug-and-play manner (Wei et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2024). 

## 3 Thinking with Images as Active Evidence Acquisition 

We present a unified view of Thinking with Im-ages (TwI) as a budgeted process of active visual evidence acquisition (Su et al., 2025). This sec-tion serves as preliminaries: it defines the iterative propose–select–render interface and two represen-tative visual operators (Figure 2). Our goal here is not to prescribe a particular selection algorithm, but to provide a common formulation for analyzing when different TwI instantiations help or hurt in later sections (Wei et al., 2022). 

3.1 TwI as Budgeted Evidence Acquisition 

Given an image I and a query Q, TwI constructs a sequence of auxiliary views {Ti}Ni=1 by iteratively selecting regions of interest (Chen et al., 2023). At step i, the model maintains a textual reasoning state R<i and a set of previously observed visual embeddings X<i = {X1, . . . , X i−1}. A generic TwI step is written as: 

Bi = Propose( I, Q, R <i ),

bi = Select( Bi, Q, R <i , X <i ),Ti = Ψ( I, bi), Xi = ϕ(Ti),Ri = LM([ Xi; R<i ; Q]) ,

(1) where Bi is a candidate region set, bi is the se-lected region, Ψ is a visual operator that renders an auxiliary view, and ϕ(·) is the visual encoder. TwI proceeds under a budget, e.g., a maximum number of steps N or a cumulative token constraint: 

> N

X

> i=1

c(bi) ≤ B, (2) where c(bi) denotes the visual token cost of en-coding view Ψ( I, bi). This constraint prioritizes efficient VLM context usage over exhaustive sam-pling, explicitly distinguishing variable reasoning costs from the fixed latency of tool execution. 

3.2 Region Proposal 

To avoid exhaustive scanning, TwI typically con-structs Bi using lightweight region proposal (Liu et al., 2024). One instantiation uses a grounding model G conditioned on the current context: 

Bi = {b | score G (b, QUERY (Q, R <i )) > τ } .

(3) This makes candidate regions aligned with the evolving hypothesis in R<i , rather than arbitrary spatial crops. 

3.3 Selection Objective as a Conceptual Goal 

The role of Select( ·) is to choose regions that are most informative for answering Q under the budget. This can be viewed as maximizing answer-relevant information gain while penalizing cost: 

bi = arg max 

> b∈B i

∆i(b) − λ c (b), (4) where ∆i(b) denotes the expected reduction of un-certainty about the answer after observing Ψ( I, b).We treat Eq. (4) as an idealized objective: directly estimating information gain for black-box LVLMs is generally intractable, and practical TwI systems rely on computable proxies. This viewpoint en-ables a clean comparison across TwI instantiations, and will be used to motivate our later diagnostics. 

3.4 Visual Operators: Highlight and Zoom-in 

TwI differs mainly in how it renders the auxiliary view Ti = Ψ( I, bi). We focus on two widely used operators (Figure 2), which expose a granularity– context trade-off (Peng et al., 2023). 

Highlight. Highlight preserves the global scene while providing spatial cues: 

Ψhigh (I, bi) = Overlay( I, bi). (5) It retains global topology and relations, but may not improve perceptual detail for small objects. Figure 2: Two observation operators used in the Think-with-Images paradigm. (a) Highlight preserves the full image and provides spatial cues to guide attention while keeping global context. (b) Zoom-in crops a region of interest and enlarges it to increase visual detail, at the cost of removing surrounding context. 

Zoom-in. Zoom-in crops the region and resizes it to the model input resolution: 

Ψzoom (I, bi) = Resize(Crop( I, bi)) . (6) Let r(b) = |b| 

> HW

be the area ratio. Zooming in-creases effective resolution as z(b) ≈ r(b)−1/2,but may remove surrounding context that is impor-tant for compositional reasoning. 

3.5 Termination 

TwI terminates when the budget is exhausted, e.g., after N steps or when P 

> i

c(bi) reaches B. The final answer is decoded from the accumulated mul-timodal trajectory {(Xi, R i)}Ni=1 .

## 4 Diagnosing TwI for Hallucination Mitigation 

Diagnostics motivated by Section 3. Section 3 frames Thinking-with-Images (TwI) as budgeted visual evidence acquisition, where each step se-lects an operator and a region proposal to render an auxiliary view. To isolate these effects under a controlled budget, we adopt a two-step setting (N = 2 ) throughout this section: the model may perform at most one additional acquisition step be-fore producing the final answer. This formulation highlights two key factors: (i) operator choice, reflecting a granularity–context trade-off, and (ii) proposal reliability, determining whether rendered evidence is trustworthy. Accord-ingly, we test two hypotheses: H1: TwI gains vary across object scales due to the granularity–context trade-off; H2: TwI becomes brittle under noisy proposals as models may over-trust externally ren-dered views.  

> Figure 3: Scale-dependent effects of TwI operators.
> Performance of Highlight, Zoom-in, and Prompting across object relative scales ( Arel ) on Qwen3-VL-8B and InternVL2-8B.

4.1 When Does TwI Help? A Scale-based Diagnosis 

We examine whether TwI suppresses object-existence hallucinations consistently across ob-ject scales. Following the POPE evaluation for-mat (Li et al.), we adapt its question construc-tion and scoring to GQA (Ainslie et al.), enabling scale-controlled diagnosis via bounding-box statis-tics. We evaluate Qwen3-VL-8B (Bai et al., 2025) and InternVL2-8B (Chen et al., 2024) under High-light (spatial cueing), Zoom-in (local re-rendering), and Prompting (reasoning-only control). Target objects are grouped by relative area Arel into Small ( < 10% ), Medium ( 10% –30% ), and Large (> 30% ) following Supplementary Material 2. A TwI w/o Visual Feedback ablation preserves the Figure 4: When visual guidance is unreliable. (a) Spatial-noise injection to simulate proposal failures. (b– c) InternVL2-8B performance on TallyQA Simple and Complex subsets under accurate vs. noisy TwI guidance. 

multi-step reasoning structure while withholding newly rendered views. 

Results. Figure 3 shows a clear scale-dependent bifurcation. For InternVL2-8B, Zoom-in performs best on Small objects while Highlight dominates on Large ones, reflecting the granularity–context trade-off. Removing visual feedback causes performance to fall below the static baseline, confirming that TwI gains require additional visual evidence rather than chain-of-thought prompting alone. For the stronger Qwen3-VL-8B, Highlight remains consis-tently competitive and often outperforms Zoom-in even on smaller objects, suggesting diminishing returns from aggressive resampling when native visual encoding is strong. 

4.2 When Does TwI Hurt? Failure Modes under Noisy Visual Thoughts 

Open-world settings inevitably involve imperfect region proposals. We stress-test TwI under con-trolled proposal noise on TallyQA (Acharya et al., 2019), comparing Standard Prompting, TwI (Accu-rate), and TwI (Noisy), where boxes are spatially shifted to enforce low overlap ( IoU < 0.3), across Simple and Complex subsets. 

Results. As shown in Figure 4, TwI improves performance under accurate guidance but degrades sharply under noise, dropping below the static base-line in both subsets (Simple: 48.2% vs. 53.6%; Complex: 47.1% vs. 47.8%), revealing an over-trust failure mode: once rendered, erroneous visual evidence can dominate subsequent reasoning. 

Algorithm 1 Active-Look (a training-free TwI in-stantiation)                                                             

> Require: Image I, Query Q, experts GA,GB, budget B.
> Ensure: Response A.
> 1. Propose (Hypothesis-driven perception)
> Targets O ← LM( Q).
> BA←Propose GA(I, Q, ∅);BB←
> Propose GB(I, Q, ∅).
> B ← B A∪ B B.
> 2. Select (Consensus arbitration as a proxy)
> Compute conflict ratio γand adaptive threshold τiou (Eq. 7). Partition proposals into Trusted Rconf and Doubtful Rsusp
> via IoU matching under τiou .Select zoom set S ⊆ Rsusp by descending disagreement score, s.t. P
> b∈S c(b)≤B.
> 3. Render (Conflict-aware active glance)
> Tgl ←Ψhigh (I, R conf ∪Rsusp ).▷global highlight
> Tzm ← { Ψzoom (I, b)}b∈S .▷selective zoom
> 4. Reason (Multi-view inference)
> Xgl ←ϕ(Tgl );Xzm ← { ϕ(T)|T∈ T zm }.
> return A←LM([ Xzm ;Xgl ;Q]) .

Implications for a robust TwI framework. 

These diagnoses indicate that TwI is not inherently robust. A fixed operator can misallocate visual budget across regimes, and unverified proposals introduce a single point of failure. These findings motivate Active-Look, a conflict-driven TwI frame-work that verifies ambiguous visual evidence and adaptively balances global context retention with local detail inspection under uncertainty. 

## 5 Methodology: Active-Look 

Section 4 reveals two coupled failure modes of existing Think-with-Images systems: (1) a 

granularity–context dilemma caused by a fixed operator choice Ψ (Zoom-in may sever relations; Highlight may lack detail), (2) an over-trust fail-ure when region proposals are imperfect, where the LVLM follows mislocalized evidence and per-forms worse than static prompting. In this section, we introduce Active-Look, a training-free TwI in-stantiation that makes the selection step robust by prioritizing disputed regions and allocating the bud-get to verification. Active-Look as a concrete in-stantiation of Eq. (1) . We follow the TwI interface in Eq. (1) . Active-Look specifies: (i) Propose( ·)

via heterogeneous dual experts to reduce single-detector bias; (ii) Select( ·) via a computable proxy of answer uncertainty (expert disagreement), serv-ing as a practical surrogate for the conceptual ob-jective in Eq. (4) ; (iii) Ψ( ·) as a hybrid rendering 

that combines Ψhigh for global topology and Ψzoom 

for local verification under a budget. Figure 5: Overview of Active-Look. Given an image and a query, two heterogeneous visual tools propose candidate regions. A consensus arbitration module partitions them into a trusted set Rconf and a doubtful set Rsusp . Active-Look then renders a global highlighted view conditioned on Rconf and zoomed-in crops for Rsusp , allocating the budget to verify disputed evidence before decoding the final answer. 

5.1 Hypothesis-Driven Perception 

Active-Look begins with hypothesis-driven percep-tion, aligned with the TwI proposal step in Eq. (1) .Given I and Q, we extract target concepts O and generate candidate regions with two heterogeneous grounding experts, GA (GroundingDINO(Liu et al., 2024)) and GB (OWLv2(Minderer et al., 2023)). Each expert instantiates Eq. (3) to produce proposal sets BA and BB ; we take their union B = BA ∪ B B

as the candidate pool, reducing reliance on any single proposer. 

5.2 Simulating Human Verification: Glance vs. Stare 

Active-Look instantiates the Select step with a com-putable uncertainty proxy: cross-expert disagree-ment (Parr and Friston, 2017; Hino and Eguchi, 2023). Regions proposed by only one expert tend to be more ambiguous, and thus more informative to verify—a practical surrogate for the conceptual objective in Eq. (4). 

Consensus partition. We perform IoU-based matching between BA and BB and partition propos-als into: (i) Trusted set Rconf , and (ii) Doubtful set Rsusp . Let γ denote the scene conflict ratio 

γ = |Rsusp ||Rconf |+|Rsusp | . We then adapt the IoU thresh-old τiou based on γ:

τiou =



τbase − δ if γ < τ low 

τbase + δ if γ > τ high 

τbase otherwise. (7) This “glance vs. stare” logic makes selection budget-aware: Trusted regions are handled via global context, while only doubtful regions con-sume additional budget for verification. 

Budgeted selection within Rsusp . Within Rsusp ,we prioritize regions with stronger disagreement signals and select a subset S ⊆ Rsusp under the budget constraint P 

> b∈S

c(b) ≤ B (Eq. (2) ). This turns the intractable information-gain objective into a computable and robust proxy(Xu et al., 2023). 

5.3 Conflict-Aware Active Glance 

Active-Look verifies disputed evidence via a hy-brid rendering strategy that resolves the granularity– context trade-off (Section 4). 

Hybrid rendering (Highlight + selective Zoom-in). We first render a global highlighted view 

Tgl = Ψ high (I, R conf ∪ Rsusp ) (Eq. (5) ), preserv-ing scene topology while cueing trusted and doubt-ful regions. We then zoom in only on selected doubtful boxes b ∈ S : Tb = Ψ zoom (I, b) (Eq. (6) ), focusing the budget on regions where extra granu-larity is most informative(Yuan et al., 2023). 

Multi-view reasoning. We encode all views with ϕ(·) (Eq. (1) ) and decode 

A ← LM([ Xzm ; Xgl ; Q]) . Joint condition-ing on global context ( Xgl ) and verified local evidence (Xzm ) reduces hallucinations while remaining plug-and-play at inference time. 

## 6 Experiments 

6.1 Experimental Settings Datasets. We evaluate on three representative benchmarks that cover hallucination diagnosis and general multimodal capability: Model Method Accuracy Precision Recall F1 LLaVA1.5-7B(Liu et al., 2023) 

Baseline 76.10 78.47 71.93 75.06 VCD 78.12 80.86 73.15 76.81 OPERA 79.89 85.12 73.04 78.62 VAF 78.96 81.88 74.95 78.26 Highlight 78.21 80.82 77.36 79.05 Zoom-in 78.43 81.13 78.32 79.70 Active-Look 80.55 82.41 79.29 80.82 Qwen3-VL-8B(Bai et al., 2025) 

Baseline 84.32 84.78 83.37 84.07 Highlight 85.34 85.79 84.71 85.25 Zoom-in 84.42 84.92 84.12 84.52 Active-Look 89.26 89.09 87.85 88.46 

More Model Results 

LLaVA1.5-13B(Liu et al., 2023) Baseline 77.33 81.68 70.47 75.66 Active-Look 81.25 85.93 74.86 80.01 LLaVA-NeXt-7B(Li et al., 2024a) Baseline 81.85 88.19 72.64 79.66 Active-Look 85.73 92.81 77.47 84.45 InternVL2-4B(Chen et al., 2024) Baseline 78.12 83.27 73.34 77.98 Active-Look 82.78 83.64 78.32 80.89 InternVL2-8B(Chen et al., 2024) Baseline 80.60 85.92 73.20 79.05 Active-Look 85.00 84.28 80.40 82.28 Qwen3-VL-4B(Bai et al., 2025) Baseline 83.73 83.23 82.17 82.69 Active-Look 87.97 88.36 85.76 87.04   

> Table 1: Results on POPE. We report Accuracy, Precision, Recall, and F1 under prompting baselines, TwI variants, and prior mitigation methods (VCD(Leng et al., 2024) , OPERA(Huang et al., 2024), VAF(Yin et al., 2025)).

POPE(Li et al.) targets object-existence halluci-nation via yes/no questions about whether specific objects appear in an image; we use the Adversarial split, constructed on MSCOCO(Lin et al., 2015) images. 

MME(Fu et al., 2025) is a comprehensive benchmark for multimodal perception and cog-nition; we report four hallucination-relevant cat-egories: Existence, Count, Position, and Color. 

CHAIR(Rohrbach et al., 2018b) measures ob-ject hallucination in image captioning by compar-ing objects mentioned in captions against ground-truth object annotations. We report CHAIR scores as the hallucination rate of mentioned objects. 

VLM Backbones. We test Active-Look on three representative LVLMs: LLaVA(Liu et al., 2023), Qwen3-VL(Bai et al., 2025), and InternVL(Chen et al., 2024). These backbones differ in vision encoders and vision–language fusion/alignment de-signs, enabling us to assess robustness across het-erogeneous architectures. 

6.2 Experiments Results Results on POPE. As shown in Table 1, Active-Look consistently outperforms standard prompting and single-operator TwI variants (Highlight/Zoom-in) across all backbones. It yields notable gains on LLaVA-7B (+4.45% Acc) and Qwen3-VL-8B (+4.94% Acc), indicating that conflict-triggered verification mitigates hallucinations even in ad-vanced LVLMs. On InternVL2-8B, Recall im-proves markedly ( 73 .20 → 80 .40 ), suggesting that selective zooming can recover missed objects while preserving a strong precision–recall balance. 

Results on MME. Table 2 evaluates performance across four hallucination-prone categories: Exis-tence, Count, Position, and Color. Active-Look yields consistent improvements in Total Scores, with particularly pronounced gains in fine-grained perception tasks. LLaVA-1.5-7B’s Count and Po-sition scores increase by 30.33 and 26.66, respec-tively. These results underscore the efficacy of our training-free perceptual enhancement, which strengthens detail-sensitive reasoning by refining local cues without sacrificing global context. 

Results on CHAIR. To assess reliability in free-form generation, we evaluate Active-Look on CHAIRs (Table 3). Active-Look consistently re-duces object hallucinations, with the largest gain on LLaVA-1.5-7B, where sentence-level hallucina-tion ( CS ) drops by 71.7% relatively. Some models Model Method Object-level Attribute-level Total Score Existence Count Position Color 

LLaVA-1.5-7B Baseline 158.33 91.33 90.00 91.66 431.33 VCD 150.00 98.33 93.33 104.33 446.00 OPERA 168.33 110.00 113.66 105.33 497.33 VAF 158.33 111.33 113.66 101.66 485.00 Active-Look 168.33 121.66 116.66 110.00 516.66 

InternVL2-8B Baseline 180.00 128.33 120.00 140.00 568.33 Active-Look 185.00 130.00 131.66 180.00 626.66 

Qwen3-VL-8B Baseline 190.00 165.00 143.33 175.00 673.33 Active-Look 195.00 170.00 148.33 185.00 698.33   

> Table 2: Results on MME (Existence/Count/Position/Color). We evaluate Active-Look on four hallucination-relevant categories and report per-category scores and the total score.

Model Methods Cs ↓ Ci ↓ Recall ↑

LLaVA-1.5-7B Baseline 53.0 18.4 67.0 

Active-Look 15.0 15.8 64.9 InternVL2-8B Baseline 37.0 9.3 62.3 Active-Look 21.5 6.6 64.7 

Qwen3-VL-8B Baseline 40.0 9.9 74.1 

Active-Look 32.0 8.3 70.0 

> Table 3: CHAIR evaluation on MSCOCO captioning.

Tool A Tool B C&C Ac (%) F1 (%) 

✓ 87.12 86.69 

✓ 87.87 87.28 

✓ ✓ 86.14 85.84 

✓ ✓ ✓ 89.26 88.46  

> Table 4: Ablation study of different visual experts and the Consensus + Conflict mechanism(C&C). The baseline incorporates individual experts, while our full model (last row) achieves the best performance.

show a slight recall trade-off, whereas InternVL2-8B improves both CS (37.0 → 21.5) and Recall (62.3 → 64.7). These results suggest that conflict-triggered verification suppresses non-existent ob-ject mentions and can also recover missed objects in stronger backbones. 

Ablation Study We analyze Table 1 and Table 4 to validate the core design choices of Active-Look. 

Synergistic Visual Cues: Highlight vs. Zooming. 

Table 1 demonstrates that Active-Look consistently outperforms single-operator TwI variants. While 

Highlighting preserves global topology and Zoom-in enhances local granularity, neither alone fully resolves the granularity-context trade-off. Active-Look bridges this gap by adaptively triggering local zooms within a highlighted global frame, achieving a superior precision-recall balance that surpasses individual visual perspectives. 

Efficacy of Conflict Arbitration. Ablation stud-ies in Table 4 reveal that simply increasing the number of proposals can be counter-productive: a naive union of dual experts ( Union A ∪ B) yields lower accuracy (86.14%) than a standalone Expert B (87.87%). This counter-intuitive result suggests that unstructured aggregation propagates conflict-ing false positives, leading to over-confident yet erroneous decisions. Active-Look mitigates this by treating expert disagreements as triggers for targeted verification, effectively transforming addi-tional perceptual noise into resolved certainty. 

## 7 Conclusion 

In this work, we present an empirical study of Think-with-Images (TwI) and identify two key findings: (i) operator effectiveness (Highlight vs. Zoom-in) is regime-dependent, varying with ob-ject scale and reasoning difficulty, and (ii) TwI can become fragile under imperfect proposals due to an over-trust failure mode. Motivated by these diagnostics, we propose Active-Look, a training-free framework that allocates perceptual resources based on uncertainty via a glance–stare mecha-nism. Through Dual-Expert Consensus, Active-Look isolates visual-logical conflicts, preserves global topology with Highlight, and applies selec-tive Zoom-in only where additional granularity is most informative. Experiments across multiple benchmarks demonstrate improved hallucination mitigation and robustness under noisy guidance, suggesting conflict-driven evidence acquisition as a direction for reliable multimodal reasoning. Acknowledgement 

This work is sponsored by Beijing Nova Program. 

## Limitations 

While Active-Look demonstrates significant effec-tiveness in mitigating object-existence hallucina-tions, we acknowledge three limitations. (I) Our framework relies on the recall capability of exter-nal grounding experts . Although the dual-expert strategy improves coverage, the system may still fail to verify targets that are missed by both de-tectors, particularly for extremely rare objects or abstract concepts. (II) We clarify that the "budget" constraint B defined in Eq. (2) specifically targets the visual token consumption of the LVLM, rather than total system latency. While Active-Look opti-mizes the reasoning process by selectively zoom-ing only into conflicted regions—thereby saving VLM context length compared to exhaustive crop-ping—the hypothesis-driven perception stage in-curs a fixed computational overhead due to the execution of dual external experts. Therefore, our framework represents a strategic trade-off: we in-vest strictly budgeted pre-processing computation to ensure token economy and higher faithfulness, preventing the LVLM’s context window from be-ing overwhelmed by irrelevant visual information. (III) Our current conflict-aware arbitration is opti-mized primarily for object existence and attribute verification. Extending this paradigm to correct hal-lucinations in complex spatial reasoning or action understanding remains a direction for future work. 

## Ethical Considerations 

We propose Active-Look to improve the faithful-ness of LVLMs, yet we acknowledge specific ethi-cal implications associated with its deployment. 

Bias Propagation. Our framework relies on het-erogeneous grounding experts (GroundingDINO, OWLv2) for region proposals. Consequently, the system may inherit or amplify biases present in these foundational detectors. If these tools ex-hibit performance disparities across different demo-graphics or cultural contexts, Active-Look could inadvertently produce biased verification results. 

Privacy and Surveillance. The core “Zoom-in” operator is designed to resolve visual ambiguity by increasing local resolution. In real-world ap-plications, this capability raises privacy concerns, as it could be repurposed to extract fine-grained details or Personally Identifiable Information (PII) from global scenes. Practitioners must apply strict privacy safeguards when deploying such granular inspection tools. 

## References         

> Manoj Acharya, Kushal Kafle, and Christopher Kanan. 2019. Tallyqa: Answering complex counting ques-tions. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 33, pages 8076–8084. Joshua Ainslie, James Lee-Thorp, Michiel de Jong, Yury Zemlyanskiy, Federico Lebron, and Sumit Sanghai. Gqa: Training generalized multi-query transformer models from multi-head checkpoints. In The 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing .Shuai Bai, Yuxuan Cai, Ruizhe Chen, Keqin Chen, Xionghui Chen, Zesen Cheng, Lianghao Deng, Wei Ding, Chang Gao, Chunjiang Ge, Wenbin Ge, Zhi-fang Guo, Qidong Huang, Jie Huang, Fei Huang, Binyuan Hui, Shutong Jiang, Zhaohai Li, Mingsheng Li, and 45 others. 2025. Qwen3-vl technical report.
> Preprint , arXiv:2511.21631. Keqin Chen, Zhao Zhang, Weili Zeng, Richong Zhang, Feng Zhu, and Rui Zhao. 2023. Shikra: Unleashing multimodal llm’s referential dialogue magic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.15195 .Zhe Chen, Weiyun Wang, Yue Cao, Yangzhou Liu, Zhangwei Gao, Erfei Cui, Jinguo Zhu, Shenglong Ye, Hao Tian, Zhaoyang Liu, and 1 others. 2024. Expanding performance boundaries of open-source multimodal models with model, data, and test-time scaling. CoRR .Chaoyou Fu, Peixian Chen, Yunhang Shen, Yulei Qin, Mengdan Zhang, Xu Lin, Jinrui Yang, Xiawu Zheng, Ke Li, Xing Sun, Yunsheng Wu, Rongrong Ji, Caifeng Shan, and Ran He. 2025. Mme: A compre-hensive evaluation benchmark for multimodal large language models. Preprint , arXiv:2306.13394. Shanshan Han, Qifan Zhang, Yuhang Yao, Weizhao Jin, and Zhaozhuo Xu. 2024. Llm multi-agent sys-tems: Challenges and open problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03578 .Junda He, Christoph Treude, and David Lo. 2025. Llm-based multi-agent systems for software engineering: Literature review, vision, and the road ahead. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Method-ology , 34(5):1–30. Hideitsu Hino and Shinto Eguchi. 2023. Active learn-ing by query by committee with robust divergences.
> Information Geometry , 6(1):81–106. Qidong Huang, Xiaoyi Dong, Pan Zhang, Bin Wang, Conghui He, Jiaqi Wang, Dahua Lin, Weiming Zhang, and Nenghai Yu. 2024. Opera: Alleviating

hallucination in multi-modal large language models via over-trust penalty and retrospection-allocation. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 13418– 13427. Sicong Leng, Hang Zhang, Guanzheng Chen, Xin Li, Shijian Lu, Chunyan Miao, and Lidong Bing. 2024. Mitigating object hallucinations in large vision-language models through visual contrastive decod-ing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 13872–13882. Feng Li, Renrui Zhang, Hao Zhang, Yuanhan Zhang, Bo Li, Wei Li, Zejun Ma, and Chunyuan Li. 2024a. Llava-next-interleave: Tackling multi-image, video, and 3d in large multimodal models. CoRR .Xinyi Li, Sai Wang, Siqi Zeng, Yu Wu, and Yi Yang. 2024b. A survey on llm-based multi-agent sys-tems: workflow, infrastructure, and challenges. Vici-nagearth , 1(1):9. Yifan Li, Yifan Du, Kun Zhou, Jinpeng Wang, Xin Zhao, and Ji-Rong Wen. Evaluating object hallucination in large vision-language models. In The 2023 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing .Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, Lubomir Bourdev, Ross Girshick, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and Piotr Dol-lár. 2015. Microsoft coco: Common objects in con-text. Preprint , arXiv:1405.0312. Daizong Liu, Mingyu Yang, Xiaoye Qu, Pan Zhou, Yu Cheng, and Wei Hu. 2025. A survey of attacks on large vision–language models: Resources, advances, and future trends. IEEE Transactions on Neural Net-works and Learning Systems .Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. 2023. Visual instruction tuning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:34892– 34916. Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Qing Jiang, Chunyuan Li, Jian-wei Yang, Hang Su, and 1 others. 2024. Grounding dino: Marrying dino with grounded pre-training for open-set object detection. In European conference on computer vision , pages 38–55. Springer. Qing Lyu, Shreya Havaldar, Adam Stein, Li Zhang, Delip Rao, Eric Wong, Marianna Apidianaki, and Chris Callison-Burch. 2023. Faithful chain-of-thought reasoning. In The 13th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing and the 3rd Conference of the Asia-Pacific Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (IJCNLP-AACL 2023) .Matthias Minderer, Alexey Gritsenko, and Neil Houlsby. 2023. Scaling open-vocabulary object detection. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,36:72983–73007. OpenAI, :, Ahmed El-Kishky, Alexander Wei, Andre Saraiva, Borys Minaiev, Daniel Selsam, David Do-han, Francis Song, Hunter Lightman, Ignasi Clavera, Jakub Pachocki, Jerry Tworek, Lorenz Kuhn, Lukasz Kaiser, Mark Chen, Max Schwarzer, Mostafa Roha-ninejad, Nat McAleese, and 7 others. 2025. Com-petitive programming with large reasoning models. 

Preprint , arXiv:2502.06807. Thomas Parr and Karl J Friston. 2017. The active con-struction of the visual world. Neuropsychologia ,104:92–101. Zhiliang Peng, Wenhui Wang, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Shaohan Huang, Shuming Ma, and Furu Wei. 2023. Kosmos-2: Grounding multimodal large language models to the world. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.14824 .Anna Rohrbach, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Kaylee Burns, Trevor Darrell, and Kate Saenko. 2018a. Object hallucination in image captioning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.02156 .Anna Rohrbach, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Kaylee Burns, Trevor Darrell, and Kate Saenko. 2018b. Object hal-lucination in image captioning. In Empirical Meth-ods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) .Zhaochen Su, Peng Xia, Hangyu Guo, Zhenhua Liu, Yan Ma, Xiaoye Qu, Jiaqi Liu, Yanshu Li, Kaide Zeng, Zhengyuan Yang, and 1 others. 2025. Think-ing with images for multimodal reasoning: Founda-tions, methods, and future frontiers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.23918 .Yashar Talebirad and Amirhossein Nadiri. 2023. Multi-agent collaboration: Harnessing the power of intelli-gent llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03314 .Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, and 1 others. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompting elic-its reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:24824– 24837. Jiayang Wu, Wensheng Gan, Zefeng Chen, Shicheng Wan, and Philip S Yu. 2023. Multimodal large lan-guage models: A survey. In 2023 IEEE Interna-tional Conference on Big Data (BigData) , pages 2247–2256. IEEE. Chang Xu, Jian Ding, Jinwang Wang, Wen Yang, Huai Yu, Lei Yu, and Gui-Song Xia. 2023. Dynamic coarse-to-fine learning for oriented tiny object de-tection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 7318–7328. Hao Yin, Guangzong Si, and Zilei Wang. 2025. Clear-sight: Visual signal enhancement for object hallucina-tion mitigation in multimodal large language models. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 14625–14634. Shukang Yin, Chaoyou Fu, Sirui Zhao, Tong Xu, Hao Wang, Dianbo Sui, Yunhang Shen, Ke Li, Xing Sun, and Enhong Chen. 2024. Woodpecker: Hallucina-tion correction for multimodal large language models.          

> Science China Information Sciences , 67(12):220105. Xiang Yuan, Gong Cheng, Kebing Yan, Qinghua Zeng, and Junwei Han. 2023. Small object detection via coarse-to-fine proposal generation and imitation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF interna-tional conference on computer vision , pages 6317– 6327. Guibin Zhang, Hejia Geng, Xiaohang Yu, Zhenfei Yin, Zaibin Zhang, Zelin Tan, Heng Zhou, Zhongzhi Li, Xiangyuan Xue, Yijiang Li, and 1 others. 2025a. The landscape of agentic reinforcement learning for llms: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.02547 .Jingyi Zhang, Jiaxing Huang, Sheng Jin, and Shijian Lu. 2024. Vision-language models for vision tasks: A survey. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 46(8):5625–5644. Kaiyan Zhang, Yuxin Zuo, Bingxiang He, Youbang Sun, Runze Liu, Che Jiang, Yuchen Fan, Kai Tian, Guoli Jia, Pengfei Li, and 1 others. 2025b. A survey of reinforcement learning for large reasoning models.
> arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.08827 .Yi-Fan Zhang, Xingyu Lu, Shukang Yin, Chaoyou Fu, Wei Chen, Xiao Hu, Bin Wen, Kaiyu Jiang, Changyi Liu, Tianke Zhang, and 1 others. 2025c. Thyme: Think beyond images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.11630 .Shitian Zhao, Haoquan Zhang, Shaoheng Lin, Ming Li, Qilong Wu, Kaipeng Zhang, and Chen Wei. 2025. Pyvision: Agentic vision with dynamic tooling.
> arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.07998 .Kaiyang Zhou, Jingkang Yang, Chen Change Loy, and Ziwei Liu. 2022. Learning to prompt for vision-language models. International Journal of Computer Vision , 130(9):2337–2348.

## A Experimental Settings 

In this section, we provide a comprehensive de-scription of the Large Vision-Language Model (LVLM) backbones used in our experiments, as well as the detailed protocols for the datasets and evaluation metrics. 

A.1 VLM Backbones 

To verify the universality of the Active-Look frame-work, we selected three representative LVLMs ranging from foundational baselines to state-of-the-art architectures. These models vary significantly in their visual encoders, cross-modal alignment mechanisms, and training recipes. 

LLaVA-1.5 LLaVA-1.5 serves as our primary baseline representing the standard projector-based architecture. It utilizes CLIP-ViT-L/14-336px as the visual encoder, which processes images at a fixed resolution of 336x336. The visual features are connected to the Vicuna-1.5 (based on Llama-2) language model through a two-layer Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) projector. LLaVA-1.5 is fine-tuned on a mix of academic VQA data and multi-modal instruction-following data. Its fixed resolu-tion and static encoding make it particularly suscep-tible to object hallucinations when visual details are small or when the reasoning chain decouples from the image embeddings. 

Qwen3-VL Qwen3-VL represents the latest it-eration of the Qwen-VL series, designed for high-resolution visual understanding and complex rea-soning. Unlike LLaVA’s fixed resolution, Qwen3-VL employs a Naive Dynamic Resolution mech-anism that can process images of arbitrary aspect ratios and resolutions. It divides the input image into 14x14 patches and uses a C-Abstractor (Con-volutional Abstractor) to compress visual tokens before feeding them into the Qwen3 language back-bone. Qwen3-VL has been optimized for spatial reasoning and fine-grained recognition, making it a strong candidate for testing whether Active-Look can further improve performance on top of an al-ready capable native resolution handling system. 

InternVL2 InternVL2 is an advanced open-source LVLM that emphasizes powerful visual representation. It employs InternViT-6B as its vi-sion encoder, which is significantly larger than the CLIP-ViT used in LLaVA. InternVL2 utilizes a dy-namic high-resolution strategy where images are tiled into 448x448 patches, allowing the model to capture intricate details. The visual tokens are aligned with the InternLM2-Chat-20B language model (or smaller variants like 8B) using an MLP projector. Despite its strong perceptual capabilities, InternVL2 still operates on a single-pass encoding paradigm during inference, meaning it cannot re-visit the image to verify uncertain details once the encoding is complete, a limitation that Active-Look aims to address. 

A.2 Datasets and Evaluation Metrics 

We evaluate hallucination mitigation using three diverse benchmarks that cover binary existence ver-ification, comprehensive multimodal perception, and free-form generation. 

POPE POPE is the standard benchmark for eval-uating object existence hallucination. It con-structs binary Yes/No questions about objects in MSCOCO images. The benchmark consists of three splits: Random, Popular, and Adversarial. In this work, we focus on the Adversarial split, which is the most challenging. The Adversarial split queries the existence of objects that frequently co-occur with the ground-truth objects but are ab-sent in the specific image (e.g., asking about a "key-board" in an image containing a "mouse" and "mon-itor," even if the keyboard is missing). This setting strictly tests the model’s ability to rely on visual evidence rather than language priors. We report Accuracy, Precision, Recall, and F1-score. 

MME MME is a comprehensive benchmark com-prising 14 subtasks spanning perception and cog-nition. To specifically assess hallucination, we utilize the four object-level perception subtasks: Existence, Count, Position, and Color. Each sub-task consists of manually constructed instruction-answer pairs (mostly Yes/No questions) designed to prevent data leakage. • Existence: Tests whether an object exists (sim-ilar to POPE but with different data distribu-tions). • Count: Tests the model’s ability to count ob-jects correctly, which requires precise local grounding. • Position: Tests spatial relationship understand-ing (e.g., "Is the cat to the left of the dog?"). • Color: Tests attribute binding capabilities. The performance is measured using the sum of Ac-curacy and Accuracy+ (where Accuracy+ enforces strictly correct parsing of the answer format). Model Method CS ↓ Ci ↓ Recall ↑

LLaVA-1.5-7B Baseline 53.0 18.4 67.0 VCD 51.0 17.5 70.1 OPERA 49.0 16.0 70.2 

VAF 53.0 17.3 69.9 Active-Look 15.0 15.8 64.9    

> Table 5: CHAIR evaluation on MSCOCO validation set with LLaVA-1.5-7B. Lower is better for CSand Ci

CHAIR Unlike POPE and MME which use closed-ended QA, CHAIR evaluates object halluci-nations in open-ended image captioning. We gen-erate captions for images in the MSCOCO valida-tion set and compare the generated objects against the ground-truth annotations. The metric uses synonym mapping to match generated words to MSCOCO categories. We report two variants: The formulas are defined as: 

CHAIR S = Nhallucinated _sentences 

Ntotal _sentences 

CHAIR i = Nhallucinated _objects 

Ntotal _objects _mentioned 

Lower scores on CHAIR indicate better perfor-mance (fewer hallucinations). Table 5 reports CHAIR on MSCOCO with LLaVA-1.5-7B. Active-Look yields a pronounced reduction in sentence-level hallucinations, decreas-ing CS from 53.0 to 15.0, and also lowers object-level hallucinations ( Ci: 18.4 → 15.8). In contrast, prior decoding-time baselines (VCD, OPERA, VAF) only provide marginal improvements over the vanilla captioner, with CS remaining around 49–53, indicating that hallucinated sentences are still prevalent under free-form generation. We ob-serve a modest Recall drop for Active-Look (67.0 

→ 64.9), which aligns with an evidence-priority generation pattern: by suppressing unsupported objects, the model tends to produce more conser-vative captions, slightly reducing coverage while substantially improving factuality. Overall, these results suggest that conflict-triggered verification is particularly effective for reducing sentence-level hallucinations in open-ended captioning, comple-menting the gains observed on closed-form QA benchmarks. Remark on comparability: Active-Look aug-ments the backbone captioner with conflict-triggered re-perception and evidence-priority de-coding, where generation is conditioned on ver-ified visual regions rather than purely internal priors. Therefore, the CHAIR gains should be interpreted as the effect of introducing an ex-plicit verification stage into open-ended caption-ing, instead of a pure decoding-time regularization. We include VCD/OPERA/VAF as representative decoding-time baselines under the same backbone for reference; unlike Active-Look, they do not in-voke additional region verification, which helps explain why their CS reductions remain limited. Importantly, CHAIR evaluates the end-to-end factuality of the produced captions; thus, improve-ments remain meaningful as they reflect the practi-cal reliability of the overall inference pipeline. 

## B Data Collection 

B.1 Object Scale Definitions and Data Collection 

As discussed in Section 4.1, the effectiveness of TwI operators is highly dependent on the granular-ity of the visual evidence. To rigorously analyze this trade-off, we categorize objects based on their relative area Arel (the ratio of the object bound-ing box area to the total image area) following the MSCOCO definition: • Small Objects: Arel < 10% . These objects typically suffer from low resolution in the orig-inal image encoder, making them prone to omission by global encoders. • Medium Objects: 10% ≤ Arel ≤ 30% . Ob-jects in this range generally balance context and detail. • Large Objects: Arel > 30% . These objects usually retain sufficient semantic information in the global view. For this category, excessive zooming may be counter-productive as it can disrupt contextual relations with surrounding entities. 

Data Collection and Balancing. To ensure a sta-tistically meaningful and balanced diagnosis, we constructed a dedicated evaluation subset sampled from the GQA dataset. Unlike the long-tail distribu-tion observed in the wild, we controlled the sample size to prevent any single scale group from domi-nating the metrics. Specifically, we collected 300 distinct image–question pairs for each scale group (Small, Medium, and Large), resulting in a total of 900 diagnostic samples. As shown in Figure 6, to guarantee the quality of this subset, we used GPT-5 as an auxiliary assistant for sample screening and scale verification: it filters out ambiguous cases (e.g., underspecified referents) and checks whether the queried object is consistent with the bounding-box statistics that define our scale bins. We then manually audited a random subset of GPT-5 deci-sions and corrected errors, ensuring that the final inclusion and scale assignment reflect the intended visual difficulty rather than artifacts of automatic filtering. We will release the final sample IDs and scale labels to enable reproduction without relying on GPT-5. 

Prompt for Object Scale Classification (GQA)                             

> System Instruction:
> You are an expert in visual analysis. Your task is to classify the size of objects in images based on their pixel area.
> User Input:
> Analyze the image and answer the following question:
> “{question}”
> Task: If the answer is YES (the object exists), clas-sify its size based on the percentage of image area it occupies: •Small: Object occupies <10% of total image area (e.g., small birds, distant objects). •Medium: Object occupies 10% –30% of total im-age area (e.g., people at medium distance). •Large: Object occupies >30% of total image area (e.g., close-up objects, dominant subjects).
> Output Format (JSON):
> {"exists": true/false, "size": "small"/"medium"/"large" (only if exists is true), "confidence": "high"/"medium"/"low" }
> Note: If the object does NOT exist, return
> {"exists": false} .

Figure 6: The prompt used to categorize GQA samples into Small, Medium, and Large scales based on visual evidence area. 

B.2 TallyQA Data Collection 

Complementary to the scale-based analysis, we extend our evaluation to the counting domain us-ing the TallyQA dataset. Counting tasks impose a unique challenge, specifically when dealing with dense scenes. To rigorously assess the model’s robustness against visual interference, we classify the samples into two difficulty levels based on the spatial arrangement and visibility of the objects. Prompt for TallyQA Difficulty Classifica-tion         

> System Instruction:
> You are an expert in visual analysis. Your task is to classify the difficulty of counting tasks in images.
> User Input:
> Analyze the image and evaluate the difficulty of this counting task: Question: “{question}”
> Answer: “{label}”
> Difficulty Classification Criteria:
> •Simple: Objects are clearly visible, well-separated, with minimal occlusion (e.g., 1–3 distinct objects in clear view). •Complex: Objects are heavily occluded, cluttered, or require distinguishing similar objects in complex scenes (e.g., dense crowds, overlapping items).
> Response Format (JSON):
> {"difficulty": "Simple"/"Complex", "confidence": "high"/"low" }
> Note: Analyze carefully and provide your classifica-tion.

Figure 7: The specific prompt used to categorize Tal-lyQA samples into Simple and Complex difficulty levels based on occlusion and scene complexity. 

Difficulty Definitions. Unlike standard splits that focus on question complexity, we define difficulty based on object occlusion and separation: • Simple Samples (Isolated): The target ob-jects in these images are spatially separated with clear, non-overlapping boundaries. The background is relatively clean, and each in-stance is fully visible, making the detection task straightforward. • Complex Samples (Occluded): This cate-gory targets scenarios with high levels of 

occlusion and dense clustering. In these samples, objects significantly overlap with one another or are partially blocked by back-ground elements. The core challenge lies in 

visual disentanglement —the model must dis-tinguish individual instances despite shared boundaries and partial visibility. As shown in Figure 7, to construct this occlusion-aware subset, we employed GPT-5 as an auxiliary assistant to refine the data selection. Since meta-data regarding occlusion is not explicitly provided in the raw dataset: 1. We tasked the model to analyze the image con-tent and filter out samples where objects are clearly separated (assigning them to Simple ). 2. We specifically selected samples where the model described the scene using occlusion-related cues such as “crowded,” “stacked,” or “overlapping” (assigning them to Complex ). We then manually audited a random subset of GPT-5 decisions and corrected errors to mitigate poten-tial filtering bias and labeling noise. Finally, we sampled 300 pairs for the Simple (Isolated) cate-gory and 300 pairs for the Complex (Occluded) category, ensuring a balanced evaluation of the method’s performance under varying degrees of visual obstruction. 

## C Implementation Details 

We implement Active-Look using PyTorch and deploy the LVLM backbones via vLLM for ef-ficient inference. The dual-expert system uti-lizes GroundingDINO and OWLv2 (specifically 

owlv2-base-patch16-ensemble ) as the region proposal network. The default hyperparameter con-figurations, determined through empirical tuning on a held-out validation set, are summarized in Table 6. During the visual encoding stage, global images are resized to a maximum edge length of 384 pixels to balance efficiency with context retention. For the 

Active Stare mechanism, we apply a zoom factor of 1.5× to the region of interest (ROI) to resolve fine-grained ambiguities.             

> Category Parameter Value
> Visual Perception ROI Zoom Scale ( s)1.5×
> Conflict Arbitration Base IoU Threshold ( τbase )0.6
> Conflict Range ( τlow , τ high )0.5,0.7
> Inference LLM Temperature 1.0
> Seed 42

Table 6: Hyperparameter configurations. These set-tings control the granularity of visual evidence, the sen-sitivity of the dual detectors, and the thresholds for the consensus-conflict arbitration mechanism. 

## D Parameter Sensitivity Analysis 

We study the sensitivity of two key hyperparam-eters in Active-Look: the zoom-in scaling fac-tor for ROI rendering and the base IoU threshold 

τbase used in dual-expert consensus arbitration (Fig-ure 8). Figure 8: Parameter sensitivity analysis. (a) Effect of the zoom-in scale s for ROI rendering. Increasing s

consistently improves both Accuracy and F1, suggesting that higher effective resolution on suspicious regions benefits verification. (b) Effect of the the base IoU threshold τbase used for dual-expert consensus. Performance improves as τbase increases up to 0.6 and slightly drops at 0.7, indicating an optimal balance between over-merging loose matches and over-splitting into disagreements. 

Zoom-in scaling factor. We vary the ROI scaling factor from 1.2 to 2.0 and report the final Yes/No performance. As the scale increases, both met-rics improve steadily: Accuracy rises from 0.7770 

(scale 1.2) to 0.7864 (scale 2.0), and F1 increases from 0.7894 to 0.7982 . This monotonic trend sug-gests that allocating more effective resolution to the suspicious region provides consistently stronger lo-cal evidence for verification, and in our setting the potential context loss introduced by zooming does not dominate. We therefore use a default scaling factor of 1.5 for efficiency, which achieves a strong trade-off between accuracy and computation. 

Sensitivity to τbase . We further sweep the IoU threshold τbase from 0.3 to 0.7. Performance im-proves as τbase increases from 0.3 to 0.6 (Accuracy: 

0.7701 → 0.7840 , F1: 0.7812 → 0.7956 ), and slightly drops at τbase = 0 .7 (Accuracy 0.7817 , F1 

0.7938 ). This behavior matches the role of τbase in consensus partitioning: a too-small threshold may overly accept loose matches as agreement (reduc-ing necessary verification), while an overly strict threshold can over-trigger disagreement and spend budget on marginal regions. Overall, the curve is smooth with a clear optimum around τbase = 0 .6,which we adopt as the default. We analyze the sensitivity of two key hyperpa-rameters in our pipeline: the zoom-in scale s and the base IoU threshold τbase (Figure 8). 

Prompt for Object Extraction         

> System Input: [Image]
> Text Prompt:
> Please analyze this image and the question: “{user_query} ”List all objects that need to be detected to answer this question. IMPORTANT: Output ONLY a valid JSON object in this exact format:
> {"objects": ["object1", "object2", "object3"]}
> Do not include any explanation or additional text. Only the JSON object.

Figure 9: The prompt used to extract detection targets from the user query. 

## E Prompt Templates 

To ensure reproducibility, we provide the exact prompts used in our Dual-Detector Vision Agent. The system operates in three stages: 

E.1 Stage 1: Target Object Extraction 

In the first stage (Figure 9), the VLM identifies which objects require visual verification based on the user’s query. The prompt enforces a strict JSON output format to facilitate downstream parsing. 

E.2 Stage 2: Open-Vocabulary Detection 

For the extracted objects, we construct the detec-tion prompt for Grounding DINO and OWLv2 by Prompt for Final Inference         

> Task: Answer the user’s question with “Yes” or “No” based strictly on the visual evidence provided. I have processed the image using advanced Object Detectors (Grounding DINO & OWLv2). Here is the visual evidence provided in IMAGE 1 (Detection Visualization):
> {detection_summary_text}
> Image Guide: •IMAGE 1: Detection Visualization. Green boxes = High Confidence. Red boxes = Need Further Verification. • IMAGE 2: Original Image. •[Conditional] IMAGE 3: Zoomed-in view of the suspicious region for “ {top_suspicious_label} ”. This provides clearer visual evidence to verify the object. User Question: “ {user_query} ”Decision Rules (Priority Order): 1. Visual Evidence First : If you can clearly see the object in the Original Image (IMAGE 2) or Zoomed Image (IMAGE 3), answer “Yes” regard-less of the confidence label. 2. Green Box = Strong Signal : If marked as “ ✓
> CONFIRMED” (Green Box), it strongly suggests “Yes”. 3. Red Box = Check Carefully : If marked as “SUS-PICIOUS” (Red Box), carefully examine IMAGE 2 and IMAGE 3. If visual evidence supports the object’s presence, answer “Yes”. 4. No Detection = Likely No : If the object is not detected at all, answer “No” unless you can see it clearly in IMAGE 2. Important: The detector’s confidence label (SUSPI-CIOUS/CONFIRMED) is a reference, not the final decision. Your answer must reflect what you actually see in the images. Provide your answer and detailed analysis:

Figure 10: The final prompt that integrates visual evi-dence, detection status summaries, and ROI enhance-ment to generate the final answer. 

concatenating the object names: 

“a {object_1}. a {object_2}. ...” 

E.3 Stage 3: Evidence-Based Final Inference (Yes/No) 

In the final stage (Figure 10), we employ a prompt specifically tailored for Yes/No questions. The VLM receives the original image, the visual grounding results (Green/Red boxes), and option-ally a zoomed-in ROI crop. The prompt explicitly instructs the model to rely on the visualized evi-dence to determine the final binary answer. 

## F Efficiency 

Token Consumption. Active-Look trades addi-tional computation for improved reliability by in-troducing a second, evidence-seeking round when verification is triggered. Table 7 reports the to-ken budget of LLaVA-1.5 under a 384 ×384 set-ting. Compared to a single-round baseline, the main overhead comes from extra visual input to-kens in Round 2 (1,152–1,728), corresponding to the additional auxiliary view(s) (e.g., highlighted global view and/or zoom-in ROI). As a result, the total input increases from ∼726 tokens in Round 1 to ∼2,100–2,800 tokens across two rounds, while the text output remains small ( ∼50–90 tokens to-tal), indicating that the cost is dominated by visual re-encoding rather than longer generations. We note that this overhead is budgeted and condi-tional . Active-Look limits the number of auxiliary views and only invokes the second round when the dual experts disagree (high conflict), which concen-trates computation on ambiguous cases instead of uniformly increasing cost for all samples. In prac-tice, this controlled token increase can be viewed as paying a small, bounded “verification tax” to prevent costly hallucinations in downstream use. 

Runtime Overhead. Active-Look incurs addi-tional latency due to the verification round. On an NVIDIA H20 GPU, our end-to-end inference time is about 2.3× that of standard single-pass prompt-ing under the same evaluation setup. This over-head is expected: once conflict is detected, the model performs an extra LVLM pass over auxiliary view(s), and the added cost is dominated by visual re-encoding, while the second-round text genera-tion remains short. Importantly, the slowdown is 

bounded and controllable via the view budget (e.g., number of ROIs, zoom scale, and conflict thresh-olds), enabling practitioners to trade efficiency for reliability. The absolute ratio may vary with hard-ware, batching, and implementation optimizations; nevertheless, the dominant factor is the extra visual pass rather than longer decoding. 

## G Case Studies 

We present qualitative case studies on InternVL2-8B to illustrate the decision-making dynamics of Figure 11: Regime I: High-Confidence Validation. Query: “Is there a baseball bat in the image?” The detector provides a strong grounding signal which aligns with the visual evidence in the global view. The model validates the high-confidence proposal without unnecessary over-correction, demonstrating efficiency in unambiguous scenarios.     

> Figure 12: Regime II: Ambiguity Resolution (False Negative Correction). Query: “Is there a person in the image?” The detector flags the region as Suspicious (Red Box), which typically risks a false negative. However, the zoomed-in ROI reveals clear human features. The model prioritizes this pixel-level evidence over the low-confidence label, correctly answering “Yes.”

our evidence-driven inference framework. We an-alyze the model’s behavior under three distinct regimes: (i) high-confidence validation , where tool proposals align with obvious visual features; (ii) 

ambiguity resolution , where the model must verify low-confidence proposals; and (iii) noise rejection ,where the model must discard spurious detector hal-lucinations. In all instances, the model is presented with three aligned views: a detector visualization (IMAGE 1), the original global view (IMAGE 2), and a context-aware zoomed-in ROI (IMAGE 3). The core operational principle is evidence-priority decoding : while detection confidence serves as an attentional cue, the final existence judgment is strictly grounded in pixel-level verification within the original or zoomed views. 

Case 1: Confirmation of High-Confidence Pro-posals. Figure 11 depicts a scenario where the queried object ( baseball bat ) is both spatially lo-calized by the expert tools and visually salient. The grounding module provides a high-confidence confirmation, and the object requires minimal dis-ambiguation. InternVL2-8B effectively integrates these signals, outputting “Yes” with a rationale that cites the correspondence between the green bound-ing box and the visible structure. This case demon-strates that the Active-Look framework maintains efficiency for clear samples, acting as a reliable corroborator rather than introducing unnecessary skepticism when evidence is unambiguous. 

Case 2: Recovering Recall via Visual Verifica-tion. A critical failure mode in standard tool-augmented pipelines is the propagation of uncer-tainty. Figure 12 illustrates a case where the ex-ternal detector flags a person with a suspicious 

(low-confidence) label. In a naive pipeline, this might result in a conservative false negative. How-ever, our framework leverages the zoomed-in ROI Figure 13: Regime III: Noise Rejection (False Positive Mitigation). Query: “Is there a person in the image?” The detector hallucinates a proposal on a chair-like object. Unlike standard chains that might trust the tool, our verification step reveals no human features in the ROI. The model correctly rejects the spurious proposal, answering “No.” Table 7: LLaVA 1.5 Token Consumption for 384×384 Image Processing 

Token Type Round 1 Round 2 Total Input (Visual) 576 1,152–1,728 1,728–2,304 Input (Text) ∼150 ∼240–350 ∼390–500 Output (Text) ∼20-40 ∼30–50 ∼50–90 Total Input ∼726 ∼1,400–2,100 ∼2,100–2,800 Total Output ∼20-40 ∼30–50 ∼50–90 

to resolve this ambiguity. Despite the detector’s uncertainty, the model identifies distinct anatomi-cal features (silhouette and limbs) in the enhanced view. By adhering to the protocol of prioritizing visual evidence over metadata labels, the model correctly recovers the object, demonstrating how active zooming can convert ambiguous proposals into decisive true positives. 

Case 3: Mitigating Hallucination via Noise Re-jection. Conversely, Figure 13 addresses the chal-lenge of proposal noise, where the detector hallu-cinates a candidate region (a false positive). The region contains background clutter and a chair-like structure that mimics a human form, leading to a “suspicious” proposal. Crucially, the subsequent visual verification step acts as a filter. Upon inspect-ing the zoomed ROI, the VLM finds no semantic evidence of a human figure and overrides the pro-posal. This rejection mechanism highlights the robustness of the framework: rather than uncriti-cally accepting noisy tool outputs, the model treats them merely as hypotheses to be falsified, thereby preventing object-existence hallucinations. 

Mechanistic Interpretability and Synthesis. 

Collectively, these cases offer a mechanistic expla-nation for the quantitative gains reported. The deci-sion boundary of InternVL2-8B shifts dynamically based on the clarity of visual evidence. In Case 1, the global context suffices; in Case 2, the local zoom provides the necessary granularity to boost recall; and in Case 3, the lack of visual support in the ROI prevents precision degradation. This confirms that the Active-Look paradigm effectively decouples the region proposal step from the rea-soning step, allowing the VLM to function as an independent verifier that balances the trade-off be-tween suppressing hallucinations and maintaining coverage. 

## H Additional Experiments 

H.1 Verification Trigger Rate Analysis 

A natural concern with any multi-round inference framework is whether the additional computation Partition Sample Ratio Baseline Error Rate Low Conflict (Consensus) 62% 12.4% High Conflict (Disagreement) 38% 36.8%   

> Table 8: Correlation between expert conflict and baseline error rate on POPE Adversarial (LLaVA-1.5-7B). Samples on which the two grounding experts disagree incur nearly 3×the error rate of consensus samples, confirming that cross-expert disagreement is a principled proxy for visual uncertainty rather than an arbitrary selection criterion.

is broadly distributed or concentrated on a tractable fraction of inputs. Active-Look triggers second-round perception only when the conflict ratio γ

exceeds the adaptive threshold τiou , by design re-stricting overhead to samples where heterogeneous experts genuinely disagree. Table 8 quantifies this behavior on POPE Adversarial (LLaVA-1.5-7B) by reporting the baseline error rate within each partition. The large disparity in error rates—36.8% for high-conflict samples versus 12.4% for consensus samples—provides direct empirical support for the uncertainty proxy assumed in Section 5.2. The ver-ification step is triggered for only 38% of inputs, which means that the dual-expert overhead is off-set by avoiding a full second LVLM pass on the majority of samples. This cost profile stands in sharp contrast to exhaustive sliding-window strate-gies, where every image incurs a fixed multi-view overhead regardless of perceptual difficulty. 

H.2 Scalability to Larger Backbones 

The diagnostic experiments in Section 4 were con-ducted on 7–8B parameter models, where the ben-efit of explicit re-perception is most apparent due to limited native visual resolution. A pertinent question is whether the gains diminish as back-bone capacity, and consequently native perceptual fidelity, increases. To investigate this, we evaluate Active-Look on InternVL2-14B and Qwen3-VL-32B under the POPE Adversarial setting; results are reported in Table 9.               

> Model Method Accuracy F1 InternVL2-14B Baseline 82.4 80.3 Active-Look 86.2 83.8
> Qwen3-VL-32B Baseline 85.6 84.9 Active-Look 89.6 88.7
> Table 9: Active-Look on larger LVLM backbones (POPE Adversarial). Gains are consistent across scales, indicating that conflict-driven re-perception addresses residual visual ambiguities that stronger native encoders do not eliminate through single-pass encoding alone.

Consistent improvements across both models argue against the hypothesis that Active-Look be-comes redundant once backbone capacity is suf-ficient. Qwen3-VL-32B, equipped with a high-resolution dynamic encoding mechanism, already achieves a competitive 85.6% baseline, yet Active-Look still yields a 4.0-point gain. We attribute this to a structural limitation shared by all single-pass ar-chitectures: once the image is encoded, subsequent reasoning proceeds entirely in language space with no opportunity to revisit uncertain visual regions. Active re-perception directly addresses this bottle-neck and, as the results suggest, does so in a manner that is orthogonal to the improvements afforded by scaling the backbone itself. 

## I Future Work 

While Active-Look establishes a robust baseline for inference-time hallucination mitigation, sev-eral avenues remain for extending the paradigm of conflict-driven visual verification. 

End-to-End Active Perception. Currently, our framework operates in a training-free manner, re-lying on external, frozen grounding experts to propose candidate regions. This dependency im-poses an upper bound on performance defined by the recall of these off-the-shelf tools. Future re-search should explore end-to-end training strate-gies where the LVLM learns to generate its own “visual queries” or control the zooming mechanism directly via differentiable attention. By internaliz-ing the proposal step, the model could align visual acquisition more tightly with its internal reason-ing state, potentially capturing abstract or long-tail concepts that generic object detectors miss. 

Efficiency-Aware Dynamic Computation. The parallel execution of dual experts and the encoding of auxiliary zoomed views introduce inference la-tency, presenting a trade-off between faithfulness and speed. Future work will investigate adaptive computation techniques, such as early-exit mecha-nisms or lightweight “scout” models, to determine when expensive verification is strictly necessary. Furthermore, optimizing the token usage of high-resolution crops—perhaps through adaptive token merging or compressive sensing—could reduce the computational overhead of the verification phase without compromising the granularity required for fine-grained perception. 

Beyond Object Existence: Spatial and Temporal Reasoning. Our current arbitration mechanism is optimized primarily for object existence and at-tribute verification. However, hallucinations in LVLMs often manifest as erroneous spatial relation-ships (e.g., “left of” vs. “right of”) or misidentified actions. Extending Active-Look to these domains requires new forms of visual evidence beyond static crops, such as relational highlighting or temporal segment retrieval in video inputs. We aim to gener-alize the conflict-detection logic to these complex reasoning tasks, enabling the system to actively verify structural and temporal hypotheses.