Title: IT3: Idempotent Test-Time Training

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=MHiTGWDbIb

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# IT 3: Idempotent Test-Time Training 

Nikita Durasov * 1 Assaf Shocher * 2 Doruk Oner 3 Gal Chechik 2 Alexei A. Efros 4 Pascal Fua 1

## Abstract 

Deep learning models often struggle when de-ployed in real-world settings due to distribution shifts between training and test data. While ex-isting approaches like domain adaptation and test-time training (TTT) offer partial solutions, they typically require additional data or domain-specific auxiliary tasks. We present Idempotent Test-Time Training (IT 3), a novel approach that enables on-the-fly adaptation to distribution shifts using only the current test instance, without any auxiliary task design. Our key insight is that enforcing idempotence—where repeated appli-cations of a function yield the same result—can effectively replace domain-specific auxiliary tasks used in previous TTT methods. We theoretically connect idempotence to prediction confidence and demonstrate that minimizing the distance between successive applications of our model during in-ference leads to improved out-of-distribution per-formance. Extensive experiments across diverse domains (including image classification, aerody-namics prediction, and aerial segmentation) and architectures (MLPs, CNNs, GNNs) show that IT 3 consistently outperforms existing approaches while being simpler and more widely applicable. Our results suggest that idempotence provides a universal principle for test-time adaptation that generalizes across domains and architectures. 

poster / code / video / web 

## 1. Introduction 

Supervised learning methods, while powerful, typically as-sume that training and test data come from the same distri-bution. Unfortunately, this is rarely true in practice. Data         

> This work was supported in part by the Swiss National Sci-ence Foundation. *Equal contribution 1CVLAB, EPFL 2NVIDIA
> 3NeuraVision Lab, Bilkent University 4UC Berkeley. Correspon-dence to: Nikita Durasov <nikita.durasov@nvidia.com >.
> Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine Learning , Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025 by the author(s).

encountered by systems operating in the real world often differs substantially from what they were trained on due to data distribution shifts over time or other changes in the environment. This inevitably degrades performance, even in state-of-the-art models (Recht et al., 2018; Hendrycks et al., 2021; Yao et al., 2022). Machine learning systems used in production not only need to adapt to distribution shifts but also must do so on-the-fly using very limited data. Thus, in this work, we focus on adapting to distribution shifts on-the-fly using only the current test instance or batch, without access to any additional labeled or unlabeled data during inference. During training, the model only has access to the base distribution training data, without any knowledge of the test distribution, which may be different. Adversarial robustness and domain adaptation address re-lated challenges. However, they typically require additional data either during training or inference, and sometimes rely on specific assumptions about the nature of the shift. While effective when such additional knowledge is available, they are not designed for immediate, instance-level adaptation and are not applicable in the scenario we envision. Test-Time Training (TTT) (Sun et al., 2020) offers a promis-ing alternative by adapting the model during inference by performing an auxiliary self-supervised task on each test sample. This enables the model to handle corrupted and Out-of-Distribution (OOD) data using only the current test instance or batch, without access to anything else. However, TTT requires performing an auxiliary task specific to the data modality, such as orientation prediction or inpainting for image data (Gandelsman et al., 2022). And defining an appropriate auxiliary task is not straightforward in general. In this paper, we argue that enforcing idempotence can profitably replace the auxiliary tasks in TTT and yields an approach we dub IT 3 that is a versatile and powerful while generalizing well across domains and architectures. More specifically, let f be a deep network that takes as input a vector x and a second auxiliary variable that can either be the ground truth label y corresponding to x or a neutral uninformative signal 0. In (Durasov et al., 2024b), it was shown that if such a network is trained so that f (x, 0) = 

f (x, y) = y, then at test time the distance || f (x, f (x, 0)) −

f (x, 0)|| correlates strongly with the prediction error. What if, at test time, we could actively minimize this distance 1IT³: Idempotent Test-Time Training             

> Figure 1. Idempotent Test-Time Training (IT 3) approach. During training (left), the model fθis trained to predict the label ywith or without ygiven to it as input. At test time (right), when given a corrupted input, the model is sequentially applied. It then briefly trains with the objective of making fθ(x,·)to be idempotent using only the current test input.

whenever we encounter an OOD instance? Could we “pull it” into the distribution? IT 3 uses this distance as a loss for TTT sessions. Unfolding y0, y 1 we obtain: || f (x, f (x, 0)) −

f (x, 0)|| . This makes f (x, ·) idempotent . Fortunately, it has been shown that, while not trivial, training a model to achieve idempotence is feasible (Shocher et al., 2024). See further discussion in Appendix B. This yields a generic method that does not rely on any spe-cific domain properties. This is in contrast to prior TTT methods that rely on a domain specific auxiliary task. By leveraging the universal property of idempotence, IT 3 can adapt OOD test inputs on-the-fly across various domains, tasks and architectures. This includes image classification with corruptions, aerodynamic predictions for airfoils and cars, tabular data with missing information, age prediction from faces, and large-scale aerial photo segmentation, using MLPs, CNNs, or GNNs. 

## 2. Related Work 

In essence, IT 3 relies on idempotence to generalize Test-Time Training . We briefly review these two fields. 

2.1. Test-Time Training (TTT) 

The idea of leveraging test data for model adaptation dates back to methods like transductive learning (Gammer-man et al., 1998). Early approaches, such as transductive SVMs (Collobert et al., 2006) and local learning (Bottou & Vapnik, 1992), aimed to adapt predictions for specific test samples rather than generalizing across unseen data. Training neural networks solely on single test instances, without pre-training, has been demonstrated in the ”deep internal learning” line of work, for many image enhance-ment tasks (Shocher et al., 2018; Gandelsman et al., 2019) and single image generative models (Shocher et al., 2019; Shaham et al., 2019). 

Distribution Shifts : TTT has emerged as a solution to the problem of generalization under distribution shifts. Using a pre-trained network and at test-time refining on a single instance each time. In the foundational work of Sun et al. (2020), the model is adjusted in real-time by solving an auxiliary self-supervised task, such as predicting image ro-tations, on each test sample. This on-the-fly adaptation has proven good at improving robustness on corrupted and Out-Of-Distribution (OOD) data. As the self-supervised learning methods became more efficient (He et al., 2022), they could be exploited for TTT (Gandelsman et al., 2022). Extensions such as TTT++ (Liu et al., 2021) require access to the entire test set. TENT (Wang et al., 2021) adapts during inference at the batch level, based on batch entropy, but cannot be ap-plied to single instances or very small batches. Moreover, it relies on updating the model’s normalization layers, making it architecture dependent. Another problem that many exist-ing TTT approaches face is their task dependency, meaning they are designed to work for a specific data types, which is almost always image classification. The recent method ActMAD (Mirza et al., 2023) addresses this limitation by pulling the mean and variance of data embeddings closer to those of the training data, improving predictions on out-of-distribution or corrupted data. While its effectiveness has been mostly demonstrated on image data, the approach has the potential to be applied to other types of data as well and we will use as one of the baselines we compare against. In (Park et al., 2024), the authors propose a test-time adap-tation method for depth completion, fine-tuning a specific adaptor layer using a consistency loss between two predic-tions. However, the approach is tailored to depth completion and not applicable to other tasks. 

TTT vs. Test Time Adaptation (TTA) : TTT operates per-instance, with no assumption that future test data will be similar. In contrast, TTA (Liang et al., 2024) adapts using a large test set from the same shift (Batch/Domain TTA), or assuming correlation between instances (Online TTA). 2IT³: Idempotent Test-Time Training 

Most previous work (Sun et al., 2020; Gandelsman et al., 2022) have thus treated TTA and TTT as distinct paradigms rather than direct competitors. TTA exploits abundant test data but cannot tune the training process, while TTT shapes training but handles every test instance in isolation. Each approach suits different scenarios. 

2.2. Idempotence in Deep Learning 

Idempotence, a concept rooted in mathematics and func-tional programming, refers to an operation whose repeated application yields the same result as a single application. Mathematically, for a function f , being idempotent means 

f (f (x)) = f (x), ∀x . (1) In other words, applying the function multiple times has no effect beyond the first one. In the context of linear op-erators, idempotence corresponds to orthogonal projection. Over Rn, these are matrices A that satisfy A2 = A, with eigenvalues of either 0 or 1; they can be interpreted as geo-metrically preserving certain components while nullifying others. This concept was recently applied in generative modeling. Idempotent Generative Network (IGN) (Shocher et al., 2024) is a generative model that maps data instances to themselves, f (x) = x, and maps latents to targets that also map to themselves, f (f (z)) = f (z). It was shown to ’project’ corrupted images onto the data manifold, effec-tively removing the corruptions without prior knowledge of the degradation. Energy-Based Models (EBMs; (Ackley et al., 1985)) offer a related perspective by defining a function f that assigns energy scores to inputs, with higher energy indicating less desirable or likely examples, and lower energy indicating those that fit the model well. IGN introduces a similar con-cept but frames it differently: Instead of f directly serving as the energy function, the energy is implicitly defined via the difference δ(y) = D(f (y), y ), where D measures the distance between the model’s prediction and its input. In this framework, training f to be idempotent minimizes δ(f (z)) ,pushing the model toward a low-energy configuration where its outputs remain stable under repeated applications. Thus, 

f can be interpreted as a transition operator that drives high-energy inputs toward a low-energy, stable domain, reducing the need for separate optimization procedures to find the energy minimum. In concurrent work, the ZigZag method has first been pro-posed and then extended to recursive networks (Durasov et al., 2024a;b). It introduces idempotence as a means to assess uncertainty in neural network predictions. ZigZag op-erates by recursively feeding the model’s predictions back as inputs, allowing the model to refine its outputs. The consistency between successive predictions acts as an un-certainty metric, where stable, unchanged outputs indicate higher confidence, while divergent predictions signal un-certainty or out-of-distribution (OOD) data. Unlike popu-lar sampling-based uncertainty estimation methods (Gal & Ghahramani, 2016; Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017; Wen et al., 2020; Durasov et al., 2021), ZigZag does not require many forward passes or complex sampling, making it more computationally efficient for real-time applications. 

## 3. Method 

Given a pre-trained model, IT 3 aims to dynamically adapt its weights at inference time using Test-Time Training (TTT) to reduce uncertainty and handle Out-of-Distribution (OOD) instances. As discussed above, other TTT approaches rely on satisfying domain specific auxiliary tasks to achieve this. Instead, we rely on the model we train being idempotent on the training set and adapt its weights at inference time to approach idempotence on the test set as new samples are being fed to it. This pulls the representations of OOD inputs back into the distribution of the training data and improves the model’s performance on corrupted or OOD instances. In this section, we describe how we make our models idem-potent for training set samples, how we use the idempotence loss for TTT during inference, and how we adapt the algo-rithm for online scenarios. 

3.1. Making the Network Idempotent at Training Time 

Let fθ be a generic network with weights θ that takes an input x. We wish to deploy in an environment where the statistical distribution of the samples it receives may change over time. To this end, as in ZigZag (Durasov et al., 2024a), we modify slightly its input layer so that it can accept a second argument that be either y, the desired output of the network given input x, or a neutral uninformative signal 0.During the initial training, we minimize the supervised loss 

Ltrain = ∥fθ (x, y) − y∥ + ∥fθ (x, 0) − y∥ , (2) as depicted on the left side of Fig. 1. This enforces 

y0 = fθ (x, 0) ≈ y , (3) 

y1 = fθ (x, y0) ≈ fθ (x, y) ≈ y , (4) 

⇒ fθ (x, f θ (x, 0)) ≈ fθ (x, 0) .

In other words, θ has been adjusted so that function fθ (x, ·)

is as idempotent as possible for all x in the training set. Of course, when x is comes from the test set, there is no guarantee of that because there may be distribution shift between the two sets. In (Durasov et al., 2024a), it is shown that the deviation from the equality of Eq. 4 expressed as 

∥fθ (x, f θ (x, 0)) − fθ (x, 0)∥ correlates strongly with the accuracy of the prediction and can be used to detect testing samples that are out-of-distribution with respect to the train-ing set. Fig. 2 illustrates this in the case of a network trained 3IT³: Idempotent Test-Time Training 

to predict the lift-over-drag ratio (L/D) of a 2D airfoil. In other words, here, x is a 2D outline representing an airfoil and the output y is expected the corresponding L/D.       

> Figure 2. Idempotence vs. Out-of-Distributionness : We plot the distribution of idempotence errors, measured by the distance
> |y1−y2|in Eq.4, for training, test, and OOD data. For OOD samples, we show the errors both before and after minimizing them globally. OOD samples exhibit significantly larger idempotence errors, which decrease after optimization. Figuratively, IT 3pushes the OOD representations to be more similar to those of the training distribution. In Sec.4, we show that this reduction yields improved performance.

3.2. Test-Time Training 

In ZigZag (Durasov et al., 2024a), deviations from idem-potence, as measured by the distance between the two pre-dictions of Eq. 4, are used to evaluate the accuracy of a prediction. In IT 3 , we propose to go further and to mini-mize these deviations at inference time to compensate for potential domain shifts between training and test data. A naive way would be to minimize the loss function 

LTTT = ∥fθ (x, f θ (x, 0)) − fθ (x, 0)∥ , (5) for all samples x received as inference time. However, this can produce undesirable side effects. For instance, if y0 = fθ (x, 0) is an incorrect prediction, minimizing 

∥y0 − y1∥ may cause y1 = fθ (x, y0) to be pulled toward the incorrect y0, thereby magnifying the error. Another potential failure mode is to encourage fθ (x, ·) to become the identity function, with is trivially idempotent. To prevent this, we modify the test-time training procedure as shown on the right side of Fig, 1. We keep a copy of the model as it was at the end of the training phase, denoted as 

F = fΘ, where Θ are the weights obtained after the initial training of Sec. 3.1, which will not be updated further. We then take the test-time loss to be 

LIT 3 = ∥F (x, f θ (x, 0)) − fθ (x, 0)∥ , (6) where fθ is the model being updated at test-time. Here, the first prediction y0 = fθ (x, 0) is computed as before, but the second one, y1 = F (x, f θ (x, 0)) , is made using the frozen model F . By updating only fθ and keeping F fixed, we ensure that y0 is adjusted to minimize the discrepancy with 

y1, without pulling y1 toward an incorrect y0. A similar idea was employed in the IGN approach (Shocher et al., 2024) when meaningful predictions are required. After each TTT optimization iteration, the dynamic model fθ is initialized with Θ, ready for the next input. Essentially, IT 3 extends the projection principle of Idem-potent Generative Networks (IGN) (Shocher et al., 2024). IGNs map corrupted inputs onto the distribution of valid data by enforcing idempotence. Similarly, IT 3 projects OOD (x, y ) pairs onto the distribution of valid ones by iteratively refining the network’s internal representations. While only y explicitly changes, every layer’s activa-tions—functions of both x and y—adjust to better fit the distribution of in-distribution representations, much like IGN corrects corrupted data by pulling it toward the natural image manifold. See detailed discussion in Appendix B. 

3.3. Online IT 3

We introduce a variant of IT 3 for a different scenario : Given data streams, where the distribution shifts continuously over time, in a continual learning setup, we modify IT 3 to operate in an online mode by not resetting fθ back to F after each TTT episode, as we did in Section 3.2. We essentially assume that the distribution mostly shifts smoothly and, thus, there is a good reason to believe that the current state of fθ is a better initialization for the next TTT episode than the original F . This makes the model evolve over time. In this scheme, it can happen that the performance of the model on data from its original training decreases significantly, a phenomenon known as catastrophic forgetting (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017). This is acceptable as the goal is to perform well on data at the present moment, rather than on past examples. We make another modification in the second sequen-tial application of the model, that is, when computing 

F (x, f θ (x, 0)) . Since the data keeps shifting, there is no reason to retain the frozen F as an anchor indefinitely. Over time, fθ may diverge far from F , making it irrelevant. Rely-ing on the old state of the model would prevent the model from evolving efficiently. Replacing it with the current state of fθ is out of the question, as it could causes collapse as described in Section 3.2. Instead, we need an anchor that is influenced by a reasonable amount of data, yet evolves over time. Our solution is to replace F with an Exponential Moving Average (EMA) of the model fθ , denoted as fEMA .This means fEMA is a smoothed version of fθ over time. The test-time loss in the online setting then becomes 

Lonline = ∥fEMA (x, f θ (x, 0)) − fθ (x, 0)∥ . (7) By updating both fθ and fEMA incrementally, with fEMA 

serving as a stable reference that changes more slowly, the 4IT³: Idempotent Test-Time Training 

model adapts to gradual shifts without overfitting to noise or temporary anomalies. 

## 4. Experiments 

We evaluate our approach across a diverse set of data types and tasks, including age prediction, image classification, and road segmentation in the visual domain, as well as aerodynamics prediction using 3D data and tabular data ex-periments. In all these scenarios, we first train the model using the supervised approach of Section 3.1 and then per-form the test-time training of Section 3.2. For each task, we design an OOD test set for evaluation, that is, data drawn from a shifted distribution with respect to that of the training set. The OOD data is divided into several levels, with higher levels representing data that is progressively further from the training distribution. We evaluate our method for each level, presenting the results as bar plots for different batch sizes. After running the algorithm on a particular batch, we reset the model to its original, non-updated weights before evaluating the next batch. In our experiments, we compare our method against a non-optimized model to demonstrate the effectiveness of TTT approaches relative to a vanilla model, as well as other pop-ular baselines. For the image classification task, we include the original TTT method and a newer more versatile ap-proach, ActMAD (Mirza et al., 2023), which we described in Section 2 and apply across all other setups. To further assess the effectiveness of our approach, we also evalu-ate all baselines, except the vanilla model, using different batch sizes. Across all scenarios, our method degrades more slowly than the baselines as the domain shift between train-ing and testing data increases. Additionally, in Appendix A, we provide inference time comparisons for the considered approaches. 

4.1. Tabular Data 

Tabular data consists of numerical features and correspond-ing continuous target values for regression tasks from the UCI tabular datasets (Bay et al., 2000). They are widely used in machine learning research to benchmark regression models. In our case, we use The Boston Housing dataset describes housing prices in the suburbs of Boston, Mas-sachusetts. It includes various features related to socioe-conomic and geographical factors that influence housing prices. We take a test set and gradually apply random fea-ture zeroing with increasing probabilities of 5%, 10%, 15%, and 20% (4 mentioned levels of OOD). This random fea-ture dropping simulates out-of-distribution (OOD) data by progressively altering the input features, making the data less similar to the original training distribution. As the probability of feature dropping increases, the data becomes more OOD, which lowers the model’s accuracy. The trained model is a simple Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) optimized using the Adam optimizer, and we observe that IT 3 consis-tently degrades less compared to other baselines across all OOD levels as depicted in Fig. 3. 1 2 3 4   

> Out-of-distribution Level
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> MAE
> Not Optimized
> ActMAD (batch=2)
> ActMAD (batch=4)
> ActMAD (batch=8)
> IT 3(batch=1)
> IT 3(batch=4)
> IT 3(batch=8)

Figure 3. UCI Results on OOD inputs : The plots illustrate the performance of IT 3 compared to other baselines across different OOD levels. The box plot for tabular data shows the distribution of MAE at various OOD levels, where IT 3 with different batch sizes ([ batch=1 , batch=4 , batch=8 ]) degrades less compared to the Not optimized baseline and ActMAD . Larger batch sizes preserve performance more effectively. 

4.2. CIFAR 

We conducted similar experiments using the CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2014) dataset, selecting CIFAR-C (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019) as the out-of-distribution (OOD) data. CIFAR-C contains the same images as CIFAR-10 but with various common corruptions, such as Gaussian noise, blur, and contrast variations, simulating real-world conditions. These corruptions are applied at different sever-ity levels, allowing us to evaluate how the model’s perfor-mance degrades as the data shifts further from the original CIFAR-10 distribution. For this experiment, we used the 

Deep Layer Aggregation (DLA) (Yu et al., 2018) network, known for its strong performance in image classification and robustness to overfitting. We trained the model according to the guidelines from the original DLA paper to ensure opti-mal results. Fig.3 shows the evaluation error on CIFAR-C at severity level 5 for different types of corruptions, follow-ing (Sun et al., 2020). As shown, IT 3 outperforms other baselines, with higher batch sizes yielding the best results. 

4.3. Age Prediction 

To experiment with image-based age prediction from face images, we use the UTKFace dataset (Zhang et al., 2017), a large-scale collection containing tens of thousands of face images annotated with age information. The model is trained on face images of individuals aged between 20 and 60, while individuals younger or older than this range are considered out-of-distribution (OOD) (Fig.5). The further the age is from the 20-60 interval, the higher the OOD level 5IT³: Idempotent Test-Time Training original 

> gauss
> shot
> impulse
> defocus
> glass
> motion
> zoom
> snow
> frost
> fog
> bright
> contrast
> elastic
> pixelate
> jpeg

0

10 

20 

30 

40 

50 

60    

> Error (%)
> Object recognition task only
> ActMAD (batch=8)
> ActMAD (batch=32)
> ActMAD (batch=128)
> TTT (batch=8)
> TTT (batch=32)
> TTT (batch=128)
> IT 3(batch = 8)
> IT 3(batch = 32)
> IT 3(batch = 128)

Figure 4. Test error (%) on CIFAR-10-C with level 5 corruptions. We compare our approaches, IT 3, with object recognition without self-supervision, TTT, and ActMAD. IT 3 improves over other baselines and higher batch size improves even further. 

Figure 5. Face Samples. The (top) row shows training images of middle-aged individuals, while (middle) and (bottom) display images of older and younger individuals (OOD). 1 2 3 4    

> Out-of-distribution Level
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> MAE
> Not Optimized
> IT 3(batch=4)
> IT 3(batch=8) IT 3(batch=16)

Figure 6. Age boxplot results on OOD shapes. Not optimized 

corresponds to a single model without TTT applied. IT 3 with [batch=4 , batch=8 , and batch=16 ] represents our method at dif-ferent batch sizes. As the data shifts further from the training distribution, our method degrades less, with larger batches preserv-ing performance more effectively. 

we assign to it. We use a ResNet-152 backbone with five additional linear layers and ReLU activations. This archi-tecture delivers strong accuracy, outperforming the popular ordinal regression model CORAL (Cao et al., 2020) and matching other state-of-the-art methods (Berg et al., 2021). We train our model on the UTKFace training set (limited to individuals aged 20-60) and then run inference on faces at different OOD levels. Again, IT 3 significantly outperforms the non-optimized model, as shown in Fig. 6. 

4.4. Road Segmentation 

Our method can be generalized to segmentation tasks as well. To demonstrate this, we consider the problem of 

Figure 7. Road Samples. The roadTracer dataset (left) cov-ers urban areas of six different countries while the Mas-sachusetts dataset (right) primarily features rural neighbor-hoods along with some urban areas. 1 2 3 4   

> Out-of-distribution Level
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> Quality
> Not Optimized
> ActMAD (batch=4)
> ActMAD (batch=8)
> ActMAD (batch=16)
> TTT (batch=4)
> TTT (batch=8)
> TTT (batch=16)
> IT 3(batch=4)
> IT 3(batch=8)
> IT 3(batch=16)

Figure 8. Roads results on OOD images. Not optimized corre-sponds to a single model without TTT applied. IT 3 with [ batch=4 ,

batch=8 , and batch=16 ] represents our method at different batch sizes. As the data shifts further from the training distribution, our method degrades less compared to the Not optimized , TTT ,and ActMAD , with larger batches preserving performance more effectively. 

road segmentation in aerial imagery using the RoadTracer dataset (Bastani et al., 2018). We train a DRU-Net (Wang et al., 2019), on the RoadTracer dataset. We perform OOD experiments using Massachusetts Road dataset (Mnih, 2013) that primarily comprises rural neigh-borhoods, as depicted in Fig. 7. We sample 450 images, each with dimensions of 1500 × 1500 pixels and divide them into four groups based on the Mean Squared Error (MSE) of the segmentation outputs, effectively creating dif-6IT³: Idempotent Test-Time Training 

Figure 9. Qualitative effect of IT 3 on Road Segmentation. From left to right: (1) Original aerial image, (2) Output before optimization, (3) IT 3 output at the 5th iteration, (4) IT 3 output at the 15th iteration, and (5) Ground truth label. The segmentation quality improves significantly with IT 3 iterations, as observed in the progressively refined outputs at the 5th and 15th iterations. 

ferent levels of distributional shift within the sampled set. We then further train the network on these OOD subsets using the ZigZag method (Durasov et al., 2024a). We evaluate road segmentation performance by using Cor-rectness , Completeness and Quality (CCQ) metric (Wiede-mann et al., 1998) which is a popular metric to evaluate de-lineation performance. The Correctness , Completeness and 

Quality are equivalent to precision, recall and intersection-over-union, where the definition of a true positive has been relaxed from spatial coincidence of prediction and anno-tation to co-occurrence within a distance of 5 pixels. As shown in Fig.8, IT 3 significantly improves performance on OOD images (see Fig.16 for more qualitative examples). 

4.5. Aerodynamics Prediction Wings. Our method is versatile and can handle various types of data. To illustrate this, we generated a dataset of 2,000 wing profiles, as depicted in Fig.10, by sampling the widely used NACA parameters (Jacobs & Sherman, 1937). We used the XFoil simulator (Drela, 1989) to compute the pressure distribution along each profile and estimate its lift-to-drag coefficient, a crucial indicator of aerodynamic performance. The resulting dataset consists of wing profiles 

xi, represented by a set of 2D nodes, and the corresponding scalar lift-to-drag coefficient yi for 1 ≤ i ≤ 2000 .We selected the top 5% of shapes, based on their lift-to-drag ratio, as out-of-distribution (OOD) samples. The OOD lev-els were determined using the ground truth lift-to-drag ratio, where higher OOD levels correspond to more aerodynami-cally streamlined shapes. The training set includes shapes with lift-to-drag values ranging from 0 to 60, with anything beyond this threshold considered OOD and excluded from training. We then trained a Graph Neural Network (GNN) composed of 25 GMM (Monti et al., 2017) layers, featur-ing ELU activations (Clevert et al., 2015) and skip connec-tions (He et al., 2016), to predict the lift-to-drag coefficient 

yi from the profile xi, following the approach of (Remelli et al., 2020; Durasov et al., 2024a). As with previous ex-periments, IT 3 significantly improves performance on OOD shapes and provides more accurate predictions compared to 

Figure 10. Airfoil Samples. Training and testing profiles ( left )show reasonable aerodynamics, while OOD samples ( right ) fea-ture rare, high lift-to-drag shapes. Black arrows indicate pressure, and red lines show lift and drag. 1 2 3 4   

> Out-of-distribution Level
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> MAE
> Not Optimized
> ActMAD (batch=1)
> ActMAD (batch=4)
> ActMAD (batch=16)
> IT 3(batch=1)
> IT 3(batch=4)
> IT 3(batch=16)

Figure 11. Airfoil results on OOD shapes. Not optimized cor-responds to a single model without TTT applied. ITTT with [batch=1 , batch=4 , and batch=16 ] represents our method at dif-ferent batch sizes. As the data shifts further from the training distribution, our method degrades less compared to the Not opti-mized and ActMAD , with larger batches preserving performance more effectively. 

other baselines, as shown in Fig. 11. 

Cars. As for wings, we experimented with 3D car models from a subset of the ShapeNet dataset (Chang et al., 2015), which contains car meshes suitable for CFD simulations, as depicted in Fig. 12. The experimental protocol was the same as for the wing profiles, except we used OpenFOAM (Jasak et al., 2007) to estimate drag coefficients and employed a more sophisticated network to predict them from the trian-gulated 3D car meshes. To predict drag associated to a triangulated 3D car, we uti-lize similar model to airfoil experiments but with increased 7IT³: Idempotent Test-Time Training 

Table 1. Qualitative result for Online IT 3. Evaluation metrics for the road segmentation task (left) , airfoils lift-to-drag prediction 

(middle) , and car drag prediction (right) . Online IT 3 enhances performance compared to the original model and significantly outperforms offline IT 3.METHOD Corr Comp Quality 

NOT OPTIMIZED 55 .7 44 .3 39 .5

IT 3 (BATCH =4) 55 .7 49 .1 46 .4

IT 3 (BATCH =8) 58 .1 52 .0 48 .5

IT 3 (BATCH =16) 57 .3 52 .7 48 .7

IT 3 (ONLINE ) 77.5 79.8 69.8 

METHOD MAE 

NOT OPTIMIZED 38 .2

IT 3 (BATCH =1) 37 .6

IT 3 (BATCH =4) 37 .5

IT 3 (BATCH =16) 37 .4

IT 3 (ONLINE ) 34.1 

METHOD MAE 

NOT OPTIMIZED 0.501 

IT 3 (BATCH =1) 0.446 

IT 3 (BATCH =2) 0.424 

IT 3 (BATCH =4) 0.412 

IT 3 (ONLINE ) 0.385 

Figure 12. Car Samples. The car dataset comprises many regular vehicles (left) and a few streamlined ones (right) , which we treat as being out-of-distribution. Red and blue denote high and low pressures respectively. 1 2 3 4   

> Out-of-distribution Level
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> MAE
> Not Optimized
> ActMAD (batch=1)
> ActMAD (batch=2)
> ActMAD (batch=4)
> IT 3(batch=1)
> IT 3(batch=2)
> IT 3(batch=4)

Figure 13. Car results on OOD shapes. Not optimized cor-responds to a single model without TTT applied. ITTT with [batch=1 , batch=2 , and batch=4 ] represents our method at dif-ferent batch sizes. As the data shifts further from the training distribution, our method degrades less compared to the Not op-timized baseline and ActMAD , with larger batches preserving performance more effectively. 

capacity. Instead of twenty five GMM layers, we use thirty five and also apply skip-connections with ELU activations. Final model is being trained for 100 epochs with Adam optimizer and 10 −3 learning rate. As with airfoils exper-iments, IT 3 significantly improves performance on OOD shapes and provides more accurate predictions compared to other baselines, as shown in Fig. 13. 

4.6. Online IT 3

We test our proposed online variation on several tasks. As-suming a data stream online scenario rather than the previ-ous setup . Naturally, when the distribution remains constant (although shifted from the training distribution) we expect superior results w.r.t. the offline setup, as our model keeps being trained on the new distribution. A more effective way to test constant adaptation over time is to use a continuously changing distribution. We test IT 3 on an increasing cor-ruption / OOD level. In all cases, the online IT 3 performs significantly better than the basic anchored variation. 

Road segmentation. Building upon our previous road seg-mentation experiments, we further evaluate the effectiveness of online IT 3. In the online IT 3 setup, OOD samples are ranked based on their mean squared error (MSE) loss when passed through the vanilla network. We begin by selecting the samples with low MSE loss, as these are closer to the training distribution given the network’s strong performance on them. Gradually, we introduce samples with progres-sively higher MSE loss, smoothly shifting between distri-butions and thereby allowing the model to adapt effectively to a range of OOD samples. As in previous experiment, we use DRU-Net trained on the RoadTracer dataset as vanilla model and 890 images are sampled from Massachusetts dataset as OOD images. Firstly, the vanilla network is tested on the Massachusetts dataset without any additional fine-tuning. We then ap-ply online IT 3 during inference to adapt the model to the OOD distribution as new data is presented. We evaluate the segmentation performance using the Correctness , Complete-ness , and Quality metrics, as described previously. Table 1 (left) summarizes the results. The application of IT 3 im-proved the performance over the initial network and the online IT 3 method significantly outperforms the offline IT 3.

Aerodynamics. We conducted online experiments for air-foils and cars lift-to-drag prediction. We set the data stream such that OOD shapes appear with increasing aerodynamic properties, modeling a continuous domain shift in the data. As with the segmentation results, the online version signifi-cantly outperforms both the offline version and the original network, as shown in Tabs.1 (middle and right). 

4.7. ImageNet 

ImageNet-C (Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2019) consists of Im-ageNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) test images corrupted using the same transformations as CIFAR-10/100C (Sec. 4.2). We 8IT³: Idempotent Test-Time Training 1 2 3 4 5

Corruptions Level     

> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> Accuracy
> }
> }
> }
> }
> }
> TENT
> ETA
> MEMO
> ActMAD
> IT 3
> Not Optimized
> TENT
> TENT (batch=16)
> TENT (batch=32)
> TENT (batch=64)
> TENT (batch=128)
> ETA
> ETA (batch=16)
> ETA (batch=32)
> ETA (batch=64)
> ETA (batch=128)
> MEMO
> MEMO (batch=16)
> MEMO (batch=32)
> MEMO (batch=64)
> MEMO (batch=128)
> ActMAD
> ActMAD (batch=16)
> ActMAD (batch=32)
> ActMAD (batch=64)
> ActMAD (batch=128)
> IT 3
> IT 3(batch=16)
> IT 3(batch=32)
> IT 3(batch=64)
> IT 3(batch=128)

Figure 14. Test accuracy (%) on ImageNet-C across 5 corruption levels. This plot compares our method, IT 3, with popular adaptation approaches including TENT, ETA, MEMO, and ActMAD on the ImageNet-C dataset. IT 3 consistently outperforms all baselines across all corruption severity levels and batch sizes, with performance further improving at higher batch sizes. 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00 

> Idempotence Error
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> Accuracy (%)
> Pearson r = -0.94
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> Corruption Level

Figure 15. Accuracy vs Idempotence on Corrupted ImageNet :This plot demonstrates a strong correlation between model idem-potence and performance. Each point corresponds to one inference batch, with accuracy and idempotence error computed per batch. The color indicates the corruption level from ImageNet-C for the respective batch. The Pearson correlation between idempotence error and accuracy is −0.94 , indicating a strong negative trend. 

used it for large-scale classification experiments, evaluat-ing performance across 15 corruption types and different severity levels. For our setup, we employed a standard ResNet-18 (He et al., 2016) and followed the Pytorch train-ing protocol (Paszke et al., 2017). In addition to our previous experiments, we included several widely used baselines on this benchmark: TENT (Wang et al., 2020), ETA (Niu et al., 2022), and MEMO (Zhang et al., 2022). The results on ImageNet-C (each bar represents the average accuracy across 15 corruption types) are shown in Table 14. Our method outperforms all other approaches across all corruption levels and batch sizes, and significantly surpasses the original baseline model. As previously observed, larger inference batch sizes improve performance for all methods. These results demonstrate that our approach is also effective in large-scale data scenarios. 

Accuracy vs Idempotence. Similar to the results in Fig. 2, Fig. 15 illustrates the correlation between model perfor-mance and idempotence error. This supports the core idea of our method: optimizing idempotence during inference can improve performance. As shown, idempotence error exhibits a strong negative correlation with accuracy. This observation further reinforces the conclusions of (Shocher et al., 2024) and (Durasov et al., 2024a), which highlight that idempotence error across multiple predictions is a strong indicator of model performance—a key motivation behind our approach. 

## 5. Conclusions, Limitations, and Future Work 

We have proposed an approach to test-time-training relying on enforcing idempotence as new samples are being consid-ered. This effectively handles domain shifts and method is generic. We have demonstrated that it is effective in a wide range of domains without requiring domain-specific knowl-edge, which sets it apart from state-of-the-art methods. The flip side is that IT 3 lacks domain expertise. In some cases, it is hard to apply IT 3 to single instances without ad-ditional conditions. This is most common in domains where information within a single input is limited. Combining IT 3

with domain-specific methods may remove these limitations, which we will explore in future work. 9IT³: Idempotent Test-Time Training 

## Impact Statement 

This paper introduces IT 3, a new approach that enables more adaptable machine-learning models by refining their predictions for out-of-distribution data at test time. Through this on-the-fly adaptation, IT 3 can reduce training costs, data requirements, and model size, making advanced AI methods more broadly accessible. The technique thus offers a step toward more efficient, flexible deployment of deep learning in real-world scenarios, where conditions often shift beyond the original training domain. 

## References 

Ackley, D. H., Hinton, G. E., and Sejnowski, T. J. A Learn-ing Algorithm for Boltzmann Machines. Cognitive Sci-ence , 9(1):147–169, 1985. Bastani, F., He, S., Alizadeh, M., Balakrishnan, H., Madden, S., Chawla, S., Abbar, S., and Dewitt, D. Roadtracer: Automatic Extraction of Road Networks from Aerial Im-ages. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2018. Bay, S. D., Kibler, D., Pazzani, M. J., and Smyth, P. The UCI KDD Archive of Large Data Sets for Data Mining Research and Experimentation. ACM SIGKDD explo-rations newsletter , 2(2):81–85, 2000. Berg, A., Oskarsson, M., and O’Connor, M. Deep Ordinal Regression with Label Diversity. In International Con-ference on Pattern Recognition , pp. 2740–2747, 2021. Bottou, L. and Vapnik, V. Local Learning Algorithms. Neu-ral computation , 4(6):888–900, 1992. Cao, W., Mirjalili, V., and Raschka, S. Rank Consistent Ordinal Regression for Neural Networks with Application to Age Estimation. Pattern Recognition , 140:325–331, 2020. Chang, A., Funkhouser, T., G., L., Hanrahan, P., Huang, Q., Li, Z., Savarese, S., Savva, M., Song, S., Su, H., Xiao, J., Yi, L., and Yu, F. Shapenet: An Information-Rich 3D Model Repository. In arXiv Preprint , 2015. Clevert, D.-A., Unterthiner, T., and Hochreiter, S. Fast and Accurate Deep Network Learning by Exponential Linear Units (ELUs). In arXiv Preprint , 2015. Collobert, R., Sinz, F., Weston, J., Bottou, L., and Joachims, T. Large Scale Transductive SVMS. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 7(8), 2006. Drela, M. XFOIL: An Analysis and Design System for Low Reynolds Number Airfoils. In Conference on Low Reynolds Number Aerodynamics , pp. 1–12, 1989. Durasov, N., Bagautdinov, T., Baque, P., and Fua, P. Masksembles for Uncertainty Estimation. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2021. Durasov, N., Dorndorf, N., Le, H., and Fua, P. Zigzag: Universal Sampling-Free Uncertainty Estimation through Two-Step Inference. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2024a. Durasov, N., Oner, D., Le, H., Donier, J., and Fua, P. En-abling Uncertainty Estimation in Iterative Neural Net-works. In International Conference on Machine Learning ,2024b. Gal, Y. and Ghahramani, Z. Dropout as a Bayesian Ap-proximation: Representing Model Uncertainty in Deep Learning. In International Conference on Machine Learn-ing , pp. 1050–1059, 2016. Gammerman, A., Vovk, V., and Vapnik, V. Learning by Transduction, Vol Uai’98, 1998. Gandelsman, Y., Shocher, A., and Irani, M. ” Double-Dip”: Unsupervised Image Decomposition via Coupled Deep-Image-Priors. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 11026–11035, 2019. Gandelsman, Y., Sun, Y., Chen, X., and Efros, A. Test-Time Training with Masked Autoencoders. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 29374– 29385, 2022. He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. Deep Residual Learn-ing for Image Recognition. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 770–778, 2016. He, K., Chen, X., Xie, S., Li, Y., Doll ´ar, P., and Girshick, R. Masked Autoencoders Are Scalable Vision Learners. In 

Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pp. 16000–16009, 2022. Hendrycks, D. and Dietterich, T. Benchmarking Neural Network Robustness to Common Corruptions and Pertur-bations. In International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations , 2019. Hendrycks, D., Basart, S., Mu, N., Kadavath, S., Wang, F., Dorundo, E., Desai, R., Zhu, T., Parajuli, S., Guo, M., et al. The Many Faces of Robustness: A Critical Analysis of Out-Of-Distribution Generalization. In International Conference on Computer Vision , pp. 8340–8349, 2021. Jacobs, E. and Sherman, A. Airfoil section characteristics as affected by variations of the reynolds number. Report-National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics , 227:577– 611, 1937. 10 IT³: Idempotent Test-Time Training 

Jasak, H., Jemcov, A., Tukovic, Z., et al. OpenFOAM: A C++ Library for Complex Physics Simulations. In 

International workshop on coupled methods in numerical dynamics , 2007. Kirkpatrick, J., Pascanu, R., Rabinowitz, N., Veness, J., Des-jardins, G., Rusu, A. A., Milan, K., Quan, J., Ramalho, T., Grabska-Barwinska, A., et al. Overcoming Catastrophic Forgetting in Neural Networks. Proceedings of the Na-tional Academy of Sciences USA , 114(13):3521–3526, 2017. Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., and Hinton, G. ImageNet Classification with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,pp. 1106–1114, 2012. Krizhevsky, A., Nair, V., and Hinton, G. The CIFAR-10 Dataset. online: http://www. cs. toronto. edu/kriz/cifar. html , 55(5), 2014. Lakshminarayanan, B., Pritzel, A., and Blundell, C. Simple and Scalable Predictive Uncertainty Estimation Using Deep Ensembles. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2017. Liang, J., He, R., and Tan, T. A Comprehensive Survey on Test-Time Adaptation Under Distribution Shifts. Interna-tional Journal of Computer Vision , pp. 1–34, 2024. Liu, Y., Kothari, P., Van Delft, B., Bellot-Gurlet, B., Mordan, T., and Alahi, A. Ttt++: When Does Self-Supervised Test-Time Training Fail or Thrive? In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 21808–21820, 2021. Mirza, M., Soneira, P., Lin, W., Kozinski, M., Possegger, H., and Bischof, H. Actmad: Activation Matching to Align Distributions for Testtime Training. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 24152– 24161, 2023. Mnih, V. Machine Learning for Aerial Image Labeling . PhD thesis, University of Toronto, 2013. Monti, F., Boscaini, D., Masci, J., Rodol `a, E., Svoboda, J., and Bronstein, M. M. Geometric Deep Learning on Graphs and Manifolds Using Mixture Model CNNs. In 

Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pp. 5425–5434, 2017. Niu, S., Wu, J., Zhang, Y., Chen, Y., Zheng, S., Zhao, P., and Tan, M. Efficient test-time model adaptation with-out forgetting. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 16888–16905. PMLR, 2022. Park, H., Gupta, A., and Wong, A. Test-time adaptation for depth completion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pp. 20519–20529, 2024. Paszke, A., Gross, S., Chintala, S., Chanan, G., Yang, E., Devito, Z., Lin, Z., Desmaison, A., Antiga, L., and Lerer, A. Automatic Differentiation in Pytorch. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2017. Recht, B., Roelofs, R., Schmidt, L., and Shankar, V. Do CIFAR-10 Classifiers Generalize to CIFAR-10? In arXiv Preprint , 2018. Remelli, E., Lukoianov, A., Richter, S., Guillard, B., Bagaut-dinov, T., Baque, P., and Fua, P. Meshsdf: Differentiable Iso-Surface Extraction. In Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems , 2020. Shaham, T. R., Dekel, T., and Michaeli, T. Singan: Learning a Generative Model from a Single Natural Image. In 

International Conference on Computer Vision , pp. 4570– 4580, 2019. Shocher, A., Cohen, N., and Irani, M. “zero-Shot” Super-Resolution Using Deep Internal Learning. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 3118– 3126, 2018. Shocher, A., Bagon, S., Isola, P., and Irani, M. Ingan: Cap-turing and Retargeting The” Dna” of a Natural Image. In 

International Conference on Computer Vision , pp. 4492– 4501, 2019. Shocher, A., Dravid, A. V., Gandelsman, Y., Mosseri, I., Rubinstein, M., and Efros, A. A. Idempotent Generative Network. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. Sun, Y., Wang, X., Liu, Z., Miller, J., Efros, A., and Hardt, M. Test-Time Training with Self-Supervision for Gen-eralization Under Distribution Shifts. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 9229–9248, 2020. Wang, D., Shelhamer, E., Liu, S., Olshausen, B., and Darrell, T. Tent: Fully test-time adaptation by entropy minimiza-tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.10726 , 2020. Wang, D., Shelhamer, E., Liu, S., Olshausen, B., and Dar-rell, T. Tent: Fully Test-Time Adaptation by Entropy Minimization. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. Wang, W., Yu, K., Hugonot, J., Fua, P., and Salzmann, M. Recurrent U-Net for Resource-Constrained Segmentation. In International Conference on Computer Vision , 2019. Wen, Y., Tran, D., and Ba, J. Batchensemble: An Alternative Approach to Efficient Ensemble and Lifelong Learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations ,2020. 11 IT³: Idempotent Test-Time Training 

Wiedemann, C., Heipke, C., Mayer, H., and Jamet, O. Em-pirical Evaluation of Automatically Extracted Road Axes. In Empirical Evaluation Techniques in Computer Vision ,pp. 172–187, 1998. Yao, H., Choi, C., Cao, B., Lee, Y., Koh, P. W., and Finn, C. Wild-Time: A Benchmark of In-The-Wild Distribution Shift over Time. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2022. Yu, F., Wang, D., Shelhamer, E., and Darrell, T. Deep Layer Aggregation. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 2403–2412, 2018. Zhang, M., Levine, S., and Finn, C. Memo: Test time robustness via adaptation and augmentation. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:38629–38642, 2022. Zhang, Z., Song, Y., , and Qi, H. Age Progression/regression by Conditional Adversarial Autoencoder. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2017. 12 IT³: Idempotent Test-Time Training 

## A. Inference Time Comparison 

Our method typically requires only 1–3 optimization steps, keeping the overall cost comparable to other well-known TTT methods. Below, we provide a comparison of inference times on out-of-distribution data for three approaches: the base model without optimization, the state-of-the-art TTT method ActMAD, and IT 3. As shown, while our method introduces no significant overhead compared to ActMAD, it remains computationally efficient while achieving substantial improvements in performance. A similar observation can be made about memory consumption, as reported in Tab. 5 for the case of batch size 128 on ImageNet-C, showing peak memory reserved (in GB) using torch.cuda.max memory reserved() . 

> Table 2. Inference Time Comparison (OOD Airfoils)

Method Base Model ActMAD IT 3

Inference Time ( ↓) 1× 3× 4× 

> Table 3. Inference Time Comparison (OOD Cars)

Method Base Model ActMAD IT 3

Inference Time ( ↓) 1× 4× 5× 

> Table 4. Inference Time Comparison (OOD Roads)

Method BASE ActMAD IT 3

Inference Time ( ↓) 1× 4.5× 6× 

> Table 5. Memory Consumption (OOD ImagetNet), GPU Gb

Method BASE TENT MEMO ETA ActMAD IT 3

Memory ( ↓) 4.5 4.8 13 .5 4.9 7.2 7.4

## B. Extended Discussion: Relating IT 3 to IGN 

In this section, we elaborate on how IT 3 generalizes the projection principle of Idempotent Generative Networks (IGN) to a supervised test-time training setting. We show that both approaches use idempotence —repeated applications of the network function should yield the same result—as a way to “project” off-manifold inputs onto a learned manifold of valid data. While IGN enforces idempotence directly on all possible inputs, IT 3 enforces it primarily on training data but adapts on-the-fly at test time to handle out-of-distribution (OOD) samples. 

The Projection Principle in IGN. 

IGN (Shocher et al., 2024) learns gθ : Z → X , mapping from a source distribution Pz (e.g. Gaussian noise) to a target 

distribution Px ⊂ X (e.g. natural images). It imposes: 

gθ

 gθ (z) = gθ (z) ∀ z ∈ Z ,

so a second application of gθ makes no change. This idempotence implies that once an off-manifold z is mapped to gθ (z),it must already lie on the manifold {x : gθ (x) = x}. In effect, 

z 7 → gθ (z) ∈

n

x : gθ (x) = x

o

.

One can interpret this as a projection : a drift or energy measure δθ (x) = ∥ gθ (x) − x ∥ vanishes ( δθ (x) = 0 ) if and only if 

x already lies on that manifold. Enforcing gθ (gθ (z)) = gθ (z) ensures δθ (gθ (z)) = 0 . Hence, after one forward pass, the corrupted or noisy input is “pulled” onto the learned data manifold, and repeated applications do not alter it further. 

Idempotence in IT 3: Pairwise Function. 

IT 3 deals with a supervised model 

fθ : X × Y → Y ,

where x ∈ X is an input and y ∈ Y its desired output. The training set {(xi, yi)} spans an in-distribution Px,y . During training, IT 3 enforces: 1. fθ (x, y) = y for training pairs (x, y). Thus, each real pair is a fixed point. 13 IT³: Idempotent Test-Time Training 

2. fθ (x, 0) ≈ y, using a “neutral” label 0 to predict y.Combining these yields: 

fθ



x, f θ (x, 0)



= fθ (x, 0),

an idempotence condition parallel to IGN’s gθ (gθ (z)) = gθ (z). One may define a drift-like measure 

∆θ (x) = fθ

 x, f θ (x, 0) − fθ (x, 0) .

When x is in-distribution, training makes ∆θ (x) = 0 . If x is OOD, ∆θ (x) > 0 initially. Test-time adaptation then updates 

θ on-the-fly to push ∆θ (x) closer to zero, thereby restoring idempotence. 

Subtlety: Internal Representations Projection 

A natural question arises: If the OOD variable x itself stays fixed, how can (x, y) become “on distribution”? The answer is that, inside the network layers, x and y jointly produce hidden representations. Although x does not physically change, the 

way x participates in the representation does change once y and the model parameters θ are updated. Thus, even if x is not from the training distribution, the pair  x, by can enter a region of representation space that matches valid training pairs. Formally, each layer of fθ has activations that depend on both x and y. By adjusting θ (but freezing the outer function call) so that 

fθ



x, f θ (x, 0)



= fθ (x, 0),

we effectively project  x, 0 into the manifold (x, y) : fθ (x, y) = y} within the network’s internal representation. Hence, even though x remains the same, the final pair (x, by) is “valid” in the sense that repeated applications are stable. 

Conclusion: IT 3 Also “Projects” Off-Manifold Pairs. 

In IGN, once trained, any input z ∈ Z maps to gθ (z) on the real-image manifold ( gθ (x) = x). In IT 3, a new OOD pair (x, 0)

is adapted so that  x, f θ (x, 0) belongs to the set {(x, y) : fθ (x, y) = y}. From an internal representation viewpoint, this 

pulls the OOD pair onto the manifold of valid (x, y) relations. Thus, IT 3 extends IGN’s core idea of “learned idempotent projection” to a supervised test-time training paradigm. Despite leaving x intact, the final output indeed corresponds to a consistent (x, y)-pair on the model’s manifold, much like IGN pulls corrupted noise into the real-data manifold. 

## Appendix C: Detailed Elaboration: Relation between Adaptation and Idempotence 

In this appendix, we provide a detailed explanation of the rationale behind the idempotence loss used in IT 3. Our aim is to demonstrate how the discrepancy between recursive model outputs quantifies the out-of-distribution (OOD) uncertainty and why actively minimizing this discrepancy drives the model toward idempotence with respect to its auxiliary input. 

1. Training via the ZigZag Approach 

Following (Durasov et al., 2024a), the network is modified to accept an auxiliary input. During training, for each training pair (x, y ), the model f is trained to satisfy: 

f (x, 0) ≈ y and f (x, y ) ≈ y. (8) This is achieved by minimizing a composite loss: 

Ltrain = ∥f (x, 0) − y∥ + ∥f (x, y ) − y∥. (9) This training strategy ensures that incorporating the auxiliary input (either the true label or a “don’t know” signal) does not hurt the primary task performance while establishing a consistency property in the network. 14 IT³: Idempotent Test-Time Training 

2. Test-Time Recursive Inference and Uncertainty Measurement 

At test time, the network is applied recursively: 

y0 = f (x, 0) , (10) 

y1 = f (x, y 0). (11) We define the uncertainty loss as: 

LIT 3 (x) = ∥y1 − y0∥. (12) The rationale is as follows: 1. If x is in-distribution, then y0 ≈ y, and since the network is trained so that f (x, y ) ≈ y, we have y1 ≈ y0. Therefore, 

LIT 3 (x) is small. 2. If x is OOD, then y0 is unlikely to approximate the true label. In this case, the pair (x, y 0) is not a valid input as per training, leading y1 to be unpredictable and significantly different from y0, resulting in a large LIT 3 (x).Thus, the magnitude of ∥y1 − y0∥ serves as a proxy for prediction certainty. 

3. From Uncertainty to Idempotence 

We now elaborate on how the uncertainty loss translates into enforcing idempotence of f (x, ·) for a given x. Recall that a function is idempotent if 

f (f (x)) = f (x). (13) For our setting, consider the function g(y) = f (x, y ). The desired idempotence condition becomes: 

g(g(0)) = g(0) , (14) or equivalently, 

f (x, f (x, 0)) = f (x, 0) . (15) Thus, we can rewrite the uncertainty loss as: 

LIT 3 (x) = ∥f (x, f (x, 0)) − f (x, 0) ∥. (16) Minimizing LIT 3 (x) drives the network toward the condition that repeated application of f (x, ·) does not change the output. When LIT 3 (x) = 0 , the function f (x, ·) is idempotent given the input x. This self-consistency indicates that the network’s output is aligned with the in-distribution manifold. 

4. Addressing Optimization Challenges 

Minimizing the idempotence loss is not trivial. Naively reducing LIT 3 can lead to pitfalls such as reinforcing an erroneous prediction y0. As discussed in (Shocher et al., 2024), directly optimizing the idempotence loss induces two gradient pathways: 1. A desirable pathway that updates f (x, 0) toward the correct in-distribution manifold. 2. An undesirable pathway that may cause the manifold to expand, thereby including an incorrect f (x, 0) .To counteract the latter, our method avoids passing gradients through the second application of f by using a frozen copy of the network (or updating it via an exponential moving average). Specifically, we compute: 

y1 = F (x, f (x, 0)) , (17) and redefine the loss as: 

LIT 3 = ∥F (x, f (x, 0)) − f (x, 0) ∥. (18) This decoupling ensures that only the first prediction y0 is adapted during test-time training, thus preventing error reinforce-ment and ensuring that the minimization of the loss indeed pulls f (x, ·) toward idempotence. 15 IT³: Idempotent Test-Time Training Image TTT (batch=16)            

> Qual=30.08
> ActMAD (batch=16)
> Qual=31.22
> IT 3(batch=16)
> Qual=39.23
> Label
> Qual=30.63 Qual=31.66 Qual=55.79
> Qual=16.98 Qual=16.11 Qual=40.64
> Qual=19.03 Qual=26.47 Qual=59.27
> Qual=63.34 Qual=69.84 Qual=77.66
> Qual=53.72 Qual=50.39 Qual=77.17

Figure 16. Comparison of different Test-Time Training methods on segmentation tasks. This plot shows the predictions of various TTT methods on an aerial segmentation task. As can be seen, our approach consistently enhances prediction quality and outperforms other methods. 

16 IT³: Idempotent Test-Time Training 

5. Summary 

By minimizing the loss 

LIT 3 = ∥F (x, f (x, 0)) − f (x, 0) ∥, (19) we enforce the condition 

f (x, f (x, 0)) ≈ f (x, 0) , (20) i.e., f (x, ·) becomes idempotent given the input x. This idempotence is a critical indicator that the input is aligned with the training distribution. When LIT 3 is small, the prediction is self-consistent and reliable; when it is large, it signals that the input is likely OOD. Consequently, actively minimizing this loss through test-time training refines the network’s prediction and enhances its robustness to distribution shifts. For further details on related projection perspectives, please refer to Appendix B. 17